Martha Gill rightly questions the proliferation of psychotherapists and counsellors (“We can’t move for therapists, but are they helping or harming mental health patients?”, Comment). As parents of a severely, chronically depressed adult child, we are sadly all too familiar with the risks of this unregulated industry: we have paid around £30,000 over several years to two private therapists, to no avail. Even qualified practitioners offer no guarantees. One introduced our daughter to an online forum full of arguments against psychiatric diagnosis, thwarting any progress in her mental health. It’s clear this industry is booming because there is easy money to be made. Many patients (and organisations) seem in awe of talking therapy as a concept. Our experience shows, however, that this lack of regulation is having harmful consequences. Names and address supplied Martha Gill highlights problems the public face when looking for psychotherapy. Good psychotherapy, with a well-trained therapist, can change lives for the better. However, as the article reveals, the terms “therapist” or “psychotherapist” are not protected by law and can be used by anyone. Thankfully, some psychological professions, including practitioner psychologists and art therapists, are statutorily regulated with protected titles. No one can describe themselves as an art therapist, art psychotherapist, music therapist or drama therapist unless registered with the Health and Care Professions Council. Registration can only be achieved following successful completion of a recognised master’s level degree or master’s level apprenticeship. Voluntary accredited regulation for other modalities, through the Professional Standards Authority, has increased transparency and offers some protection. Anyone looking for therapy should ensure the person claiming to be a psychological practitioner is on one of the accredited registers, or for increased reassurance, registered with the Health and Care Professions Council. Gary Fereday, Chief Executive British Association of Art Therapists, London Teachers are ‘Uberised’ Teaching, and especially teaching languages online, is commodified to such an extent that even the so-called gold standard, jewel in the crown British Council is not immune (“ ‘Exploited teachers forced into work feeding frenzy’ by British Council”, News). Uberfication is the right word for it. As Tefl teachers, we are sick and tired of being required to get the highest qualifications yet be subjected to minimal wages and zero-hour contracts. Websites that take punishing and variable commissions are the norm. This uncertainty and exploitation has to end. By taking matters into our own hands and starting independent businesses we’re serving the learners who need us. Abigail Fulbrook WeAreEnglishTeachers.com, Hinode, Urayasu, Japan A silver lining to Trump? William Keegan writes “How much easier the chancellor’s fiscal problems would have been if from day one this new Labour government had seized on the opportunity to rejoin the EU” (“If even Germany is embracing higher spending, why on earth can’t Labour?”, Business &amp; Cash) Labour’s election manifesto ruled out any return to the EU, the single market or the customs union. Also, after the pain of the tortuous Brexit negotiations, it is unlikely that the EU would have welcomed any attempt. However, thanks to Donald Trump and the resulting radical changes to the global situation, a golden opportunity is rapidly developing. For economic and security reasons, the UK, a nuclear power, is much more likely to be welcomed back by the EU. The EU might be prepared to put an offer to the UK for our return on broadly the terms of our previous membership, including hopefully some or all of the opt-outs. The offer could be put to a referendum. David Newens Great Linford, Milton Keynes Eel Pie was a jazz hotspot too Though Eel Pie Island may have been a venue for rockers and royalty, some octogenarians might recall it was the hot destination in the late 1950s of traditional jazz royalty such as Ken Colyer, Chris Barber, Acker Bilk and George Melly (“Loved by rockers and royals, Eel Pie Island threatened by flood ruling”, News). Riverboat shuffles from Westminster pier to the island were favourite weekend gigs for fans when trad jazz was in its heyday. David Handley Gargrave, North Yorkshire Taking my cash elsewhere So Zizzi, Gails and Itsu don’t want the disabled or young kids who don’t have bank cards? I was intrigued to see from your article on cash-free shopping that these business feel they can legally positively discriminate against the disabled (“ ‘A fundamental right’: UK high street chains and restaurants challenged over refusal to accept cash”, News). This policy is discriminatory and excludes everyone with difficulties in remembering pin codes or indeed those without a bank card. This includes those who, while able in many ways, are not able to fully manage their own financial affairs. I’m boycotting all these chains – if they are discriminatory and don’t take cash I’ll take my business elsewhere. John Jenkins Thame, Oxfordshire Mines and the seven dwarfs Snow White’s seven dwarfs are unlikely to have suffered from achondroplasty. It is generally caused by a rare mutation, so unlikely to have a cluster in one small community (“ ‘It’s controversial and polarising’: is Disney’s new Snow White a poisoned apple?” Focus). The story was first collected by the brothers Grimm near the Carpathian mountains where gold and silver mining was common. The mines also contained radioactive ores. Radiation exposure in early adolescence leads to premature fusion of the bony epiphyses preventing further growth, a different form of dwarfism. Dr Michael Peel London Just who was it in my seat? Julian Barnes’ memory about Howard Hodgkin’s black towel put me in mind of a contretemps I had with the late artist at the theatre 25 years ago (“We remember as true things that never even happened”, New Review). It concerned a chair that my then pregnant friend wanted to sit on, and that he was apparently reserving for someone else. The situation was swiftly resolved (I don’t recall how), but when I discussed it with my friend a couple of years ago she remembered it as having been Antony Gormley. Sarah Gore Ramsgate, Kent