Morning everyone. One Nation says “the ground is shifting” in Australian politics as the far-right party wins over disillusioned conservatives. We look at the factors behind the surge, including the Coalition chaos which is also the subject of today’s Full Story podcast. Plus we go down to the rail tracks to investigate a hi-tech fix for Sydney train lines, and hear why France offers la belle vie for George Clooney and family. Australia Network update | After a shutdown in May, Sydney Trains is moving from an analogue inspection system using binoculars to a laser-driven system to search for potential problems on the network’s lines and tracks. ‘Ground is shifting’ | Recent polls have seen a surge in support for One Nation as Pauline Hanson’s populist party takes more votes from Liberal voters disillusioned with their party’s stance on immigration and net zero. Dan Jervis-Bardy investigates the “shifting” political ground. Hidden agenda | A former NSW transport bureaucrat, Ibrahim Helmy, told an Icac hearing yesterday that he hid in a cupboard from police who were hunting for him after he failed to appear at a major corruption probe. Depressing finding | Women carry a higher genetic risk of depression, according to a study by researchers in Australia. In a survey of almost 200,000 people with depression, they found 16 genetic variants linked to depression in women and eight in men. ‘Obstruction playbook’ | Political and media attacks on renewable energy and climate action in Australia in recent months have come “out of the climate obstruction playbook” that has been honed over decades around the world by fossil fuel interests, a leading academic expert has warned. World Colorado ruling | The US supreme court appears ready to rule later today against a Colorado law that bans “conversion therapy” practices in what would be a major blow to LGBQT rights. Texas national guard troops have arrived in the Chicago area, marking an escalation of Donald Trump’s crackdown on the city. Israel deportations | A group of Australians who were detained in an Israeli prison after being arrested as part of the pro-Palestinian flotilla carrying aid to Gaza have been deported to Jordan. A US delegation led by envoy Steve Witkoff was due to arrive in Egypt today to reinforce Donald Trump’s involvement in the newly restarted peace negotiations between Hamas and Israel. Macron pressure | France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, is under intense pressure to call snap parliamentary elections or resign as former allies join his opponents in demanding he act to end a spiralling political crisis. Dane law | The Danish prime minister says the country will ban social media for under-15s as she accused mobile phones and social networks of “stealing our children’s childhood”. La belle vie, George | George Clooney has said that his decision to live on his farm in France means his children will have a better start in life, become more self-sufficient and not be followed by paparazzi. Full Story The ‘civil war’ brewing within the Liberal party Nour Haydar talks to the political editor, Tom McIlroy, and political reporter Krishani Dhanji about Andrew Hastie’s resignation from the frontbench, the pressure that puts on the opposition leader, Sussan Ley, and how close we are to a leadership spill. In-depth Our coverage of the second anniversary of the Hamas attack on Israel continues today with an examination of how Israel’s response has led to the ruin of Gaza with more than 67,000 people, mostly civilians, killed in the destruction of Gaza. Jason Burke, our international security correspondent, takes stock of the human and physical toll. In Israel, family trauma is plain to see two years on. Not the news When Tanya Pelly lost her wedding ring in the waves at Freshwater beach in Sydney, she thought it would be lost forever. But she hadn’t bargained for Michael Oliver, AKA “the Lord of Lost Rings”, and his band of detectorists who managed to find the precious heirloom in the sand. “You get a high when you find something of great sentimental value to someone,” one says. Sport Rugby union | Australian Rugby has joined the ruling bodies of the world’s other leading nations to attack the rebel R360 organisation and warn that players who join the proposed new competition will be ineligible for international selection. Football | After Ange Postecoglou’s latest virtuoso, post-defeat press conference, David Squires channels Greek mythology and Monty Python to chart the Australian’s Forest woes. Extreme sport | The paragliding crash in July that killed Felix Baumgartner, the first skydiver to fall faster than the speed of sound, was caused by human error, an Italian investigating prosecutor has said. Media roundup The Fin Review reports that Australians expect another property boom as sentiment hits a 15-year high. The ABC has interviewed new AFP commissioner Krissy Barrett who wants tougher laws against hate crime. She also spoke with the SMH. What’s happening today Media | News Corp executive chairman Michael Miller speaks at the Melbourne Press Club on global tech’s assault on Australian journalism. Perth | Case management hearing in Linda Reynolds v Commonwealth at federal court. Canberra | BlueScope steel boss Mark Vassella speaks at the National Press Club. Sign up If you would like to receive this Morning Mail update to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here, or finish your day with our Afternoon Update newsletter. You can follow the latest in US politics by signing up for This Week in Trumpland. Brain teaser And finally, here are the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day. Until tomorrow. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword