Axel Rudakubana was discharged from mental health services six days before he murdered three young girls and stabbed several others at a Taylor Swift-themed holiday club in Southport, it has emerged. The inquiry into the atrocity was told on Wednesday that a risk assessment was undertaken on Rudakubana, then 17, a week before the attack in July last year. Its findings have not been disclosed. It came as Rudakubana’s brother, Dion Rudakubana, made his first public comments on the mass stabbing as he spoke of “the most immense pain, anguish and grief” of the victims. In a written statement, he told the inquiry his younger brother had become “progressively more isolated” after being expelled from school aged 13 in October 2019. He asked the inquiry chair, the retired senior judge Sir Adrian Fulford, to explore “whether more could have been done” by social services and other agencies to prevent the murders. A barrister for Dion Rudakubana said: “Dion wholeheartedly supports the inquiry’s aim to identify lessons which will minimise the prospect of such harm being caused in the future.” The inquiry at Liverpool town hall is examining how such a troubled teenager with a known obsession with knives and extreme violence – who was referred three times to the counter-radicalisation scheme Prevent – was able to carry out what Fulford called “one of the most egregious crimes in our country’s history”. At the time of the attack, Dion Rudakubana was studying mathematics at the University of Warwick, where he helped lead its opera and brass societies. In his statement, Dion Rudakubana said he had “limited interaction” with his younger brother in the years before the mass stabbing owing to his studies and because he is a wheelchair user. His lawyers said Axel Rudakubana’s expulsion from school aged 13 for carrying a knife and attacking a student “plays an important part in [him] becoming progressively more isolated from his friends and family”. The teenager and his family had been receiving support from child and adolescent mental health services (Camhs) since February 2021, when Axel Rudakubana was diagnosed as autistic, the inquiry was told. However, he was never diagnosed with a mental health illness, beyond anxiety, in the years before the attack despite the concerns of multiple specialists. The inquiry was told that mental health professionals carried out a risk assessment of Rudakubana on 23 July last year, six days before the killings, when he was formally discharged from Camhs. The findings of that assessment – the third in four years – have not been disclosed. A chronology of Rudakubana’s engagement with Camhs, published on Wednesday, revealed that he in effect stopped cooperating with specialists in 2022, when he was 16. It also emerged on Wednesday that Rudakubana’s teachers raised safeguarding concerns three times about comments he made about the Holocaust and Jewish people in early 2022, aged 15. These were not referred to Prevent because the school, Acorns pupil referral unit in Ormskirk, Lancashire, had already referred him twice to the programme in the previous year, with neither time resulting in further action. Specialists raised concerns about Rudakubana’s parents, who, the inquiry was told, played a “consistently unhelpful role” in his involvement with mental health services. Psychiatrists were “perturbed” by the conduct and behaviour of the teenager’s father, Alphonse, during one consultation in 2022, according to a witness statement published by the inquiry. There was a “real concern” among professionals at this meeting that Axel Rudakubana had lost a significant amount of weight, and about a “lack of parental supervision and monitoring”. Days after Rudakubana turned 15, in August 2021, Camhs reported that he had disclosed “physical aggression and emotional abuse at home”, according to a Lancashire county council witness statement. A social worker reported “tension with the father” and said Rudakubana poured milk on his parents’ bed during a meeting of the social worker and the family that month. No recent violence between Rudakubana and his father had been reported, the statement added. Lancashire county council, the authority that had overall responsibility for Rudakubana’s welfare, said it had identified failings in its handling of the teenager, including several communication breakdowns between agencies. These included after an incident in March 2022 when Rudakubana told police he wanted to kill someone and had made poison after he was found on a bus with a knife having been reported missing by his family. Despite the seriousness of the incident, the teenager’s family support worker was not informed about it. The council said this was a “missed opportunity” to escalate his interest in knives, coming two and a half years after he had been expelled. His family had started hiding the knives at home. The inquiry is due to conclude in November and a report to the government is expected in the following months.