The Secrets of TikTok Shop: Untold 12.05am, Channel 4 Anyone else find themself sheepishly asking for Dubai chocolate at the local corner shop earlier this year? Thank TikTok for that. Beyond making products go viral, TikTok Shop is a thriving platform where millions use videos to buy and sell items, often via livestreams. Content creator Mariam Musa takes an insightful, if depressing, look at this world and how easy it is to get sucked in. Hollie Richardson Can’t Sell, Must Sell 8pm, Channel 4 “It’s my haven and my prison,” says Gail of her four-bed in Margate, drowning in faux-Victoriana and co-habited by 22 lifelike dolls. (Property expert Stuart: “Every time I look at a doll, they’re telling me to get out of the house.”) Elsewhere, Nikki’s Herne Bay property, with its gothic decor and dated bedrooms, needs a facelift. Ali Catterall Side Hustlers 8pm, U&amp;W As season one of the girlboss answer to Dragons’ Den comes to a close, it’s time to invest. From pop-up dog crates to emergency undies, there are plenty of novel ideas – but which of the fledgling entrepreneurs will convince supermodel Ashley Graham and Kardashian business partner Emma Grede to part with their dosh? Hannah J Davies Bookish 8pm, U&amp;Alibi Joely Richardson guest-stars as a film star in this fun period crime drama about a bookshop owner – Mr Book (Mark Gatiss) – who likes to solve cases on the side. When an actor drops dead on set after eating poisoned chocolates, suspicion points to the movie’s leads. HR Pearl Harbor, World on Fire 9.50pm, PBS America This two-part documentary undertakes a retrospective of the second world war Pearl Harbor attack by Japan. Expect plenty of archive footage and talking heads as it analyses the incident that led to the US entering the conflict. Alexi Duggins Patrick Marber Remembers... After Miss Julie 10pm, BBC Four Writer Patrick Marber was once best known for comedy such as Alan Partridge, so it was an unexpected turn when he reimagined Strindberg’s 1888 play After Miss Julie in 1995. Before it airs (at 10.15), he talks about making it, and working with Kathy Burke and Phil Daniels. HR Film choices Tin Soldier (Brad Furman, 2025), Prime Video Well, this is a weird one. Tin Soldier is a film where Scott Eastwood attempts to infiltrate a cult and overthrow its leader. What makes it odd, however, is how heavily this is overshadowed by its supporting cast. Robert De Niro features in a typically underpowered late-stage role as a kind of military adviser. But even he recedes into the shadows next to Jamie Foxx, playing the aforementioned cult leader. He has huge hair. He has silly glasses. He has questionable facial hair. His name is The Bokushi. None of it makes any sense. It’s sort of incredible. Stuart Heritage Emma (Autumn de Wilde, 2020), 11pm, BBC Two This 2020 Jane Austen adaptation was the directorial debut of photographer Autumn de Wilde, who brought all the experience of her old career to the table. The story of a wealthy woman who attempts to act as a matchmaker, with far-reaching consequences, has been told over and over again. What sets this version apart are the lively performances – from Anya Taylor-Joy, Josh O’Connor and Bill Nighy – and visuals that are modern enough to cut through all the period stuffiness. SH Live sport Test cricket, England v India 10am, Sky Sports Main Event. Day one of the Fourth Test. • This article was amended on 23 July 2025. An earlier version used a picture to illustrate Pearl Harbor, World on Fire that was not from the show. This has been replaced.