GlaxoSmithKline's sales in the US have slumped because some its best selling medicines are coming off patent to be challenged by generic rivals as competition intensifies in global pharmaceuticals. Andrew Witty, chief executive said that revenue generated in America, GSK's biggest market, had fallen 15% to £2.3bn in the second quarter as drugs such as Lamictal for migraine lost patent protection. "We are working through a phase of extensive generic competition," he said. Witty expects things to improve in the second half as new drugs come through the company's pipeline – GSK has launched 12 new products in the US since early 2007 and has another six filed with the regulator, the Federal Drugs Administration. GSK is hoping that vaccines being developed for pandemic flu viruses, including swine flu, will prove an important growth driver for profit and sales in years to come. "I am not embarrassed to say that we will benefit as governments around the globe increase pressure for solutions to pandemics, swine virus being the latest example," says Witty. The company's anti-flu drug, Relenza, which can be used to treat the symptoms of swine flu, is expected to generate sales of about £600m this year. Analysts are forecasting that GSK could reap a £2.5bn bonanza once the company starts selling vaccines against swine flu in the autumn. The average charge per dose will be about €7 (£6), though poorer countries will not be charged or will pay far less. GSK still has work to do in developing a swine flu vaccination, but Witty says: "We are on track to meet the orders placed by many governments and the World Health Organisation. To date we have contracts in place to supply 195m doses of the vaccine. Shipments are expected in the second half of 2009 and early 2010." GSK also has agreements in place with the US government to supply pandemic products worth more than $250m (£150m). The demand for influenza drugs comes as Glaxo repositions itself in the pharmaceutical sector, by making acquisitions and boosting sales within its consumer healthcare division. But Witty has said he is not planning a mega-merger, despite speculation in the City that GSK has its sights on UK rival AstraZeneca. In the US, Pfizer said its second-quarter profit fell 19%, as the strong dollar depressed revenues.