Scrabble your way up San Francisco's Telegraph Hill and you find yourself at Coit Tower, a gleaming Art Deco spire built in 1933 after an eccentric heiress decided the city needed a spot of smartening up. It is a strange sight – a cross between firehose and missile silo, overlooking the sweep of the Bay Bridge – but the series of frescos you find inside are stranger still. At first glance they look like benign snapshots of sun-kissed California: in one mural, farmhands calmly harvest flowers and oranges; in another, shoppers stream out of a toy store. But peer closely and you notice some intriguing political messages – a poor family desperately panning for gold while a rich family looks on; a gaunt crowd of unemployed workers; a man reaching down a copy of Das Kapital in the city library. The Coit Tower project – begun by whimsical private largesse, completed by idealistic new deal artists – doesn't make an appearance in Morris Dickstein's monumental, meandering study of depression-era culture, but it captures well the contradictions of this most contradictory of periods. By the early 1930s, perhaps a quarter of the American population was out of work; the mortgage market had collapsed; Mississippi alone had lost nearly half its farms. Roosevelt was elected in 1932 promising radical change, and promptly pushed through a rescue package that makes Obama's look timid by comparison: a blizzard of policies prescribing everything from banking regulation and agricultural reform to the construction of new roads and improved race relations. In just eight years the US had changed from a self-reliant, entrepreneurial nation that could believe Coolidge's boast that "the chief business of the American people is business" to a tangle of federal bureaucracies that – so right-wing critics feared – was in danger of resembling Soviet Russia. As Dickstein suggests, the cultural effects of this were complex. Many artists developed a keen political awareness, throwing themselves into public commissions such as the murals that became emblematic of the Works Progress Administration (not always happily, as Diego Rivera discovered after his Leninist fresco for the Rockefeller Center was destroyed in 1934). Harold Clurman founded the Group Theatre, an urgent if short-lived project to find an American drama that would confront the new politics; its most lasting product was Clifford Odets's Awake and Sing! (1935), an angst-ridden depiction of a working-class family at the crossroads. Writers as various as Michael Gold, Nathanael West, Edmund Wilson, Richard Wright and John Steinbeck revealed the squalid terror of many American lives, exposing a society whose only lasting abundance turned out to be poverty. Photographers scoured the rural south for lives that had crumbled into dust – most harrowingly Walker Evans and Dorothea Lange, who found the catastrophe of the depression etched on to the faces of its victims. But Dickstein's most intriguing claim is that we shouldn't look for the depression solely in documentary projects such as these: it touched culture at every level, and in a surprisingly exuberant variety of forms. The economic crisis may have turned America's soul in on itself, but it also fed popular fantasies of escape, even signalling a reordering of society along more egalitarian lines. If we picture a depression-era movie we tend to think of John Ford's muted adaptation of The Grapes of Wrath; we forget that, six months earlier, Hollywood had produced The Wizard of Oz, in which catastrophe on the prairies initiates Dorothy's fantastical journey of self-discovery along the Yellow Brick Road. Dickstein goes further, finding echoes of the depression in everything from the synchronised chorus lines of Busby Berkeley musicals to the lightning repartee of screwball comedies. Sometimes his argument struggles to plant its feet – it's hard to see how Deco and big-band jazz do the same cultural work – but often it produces astute re-readings of unregarded popular texts. Dickstein's virtuoso section on Cole Porter captures the insouciant brilliance of many of Porter's lyrics, but also uncovers the gnawing anxiety at their heart. Bing Crosby's rendition of the song that gives Dancing in the Dark its title, here described as a "pulsing antidote to self-indulgent romantic despair", becomes, Dickstein argues, a kind of anthem for depression culture. Even if the generous scope of this book proves its undoing, the central paradox it explores – how economic bankruptcy produced such a wealth of creativity – might give us pause for thought, 80 years after the Wall Street crash. Roosevelt's determination that culture should be a fundamental part of the new deal not only gave artists, musicians and writers a working wage; it guaranteed that the social impact of the depression would be documented more profoundly than any economic disaster before or since, and created the seedbed for some of the richest and most vibrant culture America has ever produced. As we set about repaying the cost of the credit crunch, will we be so wise?