A significant number of young people are depressed or struggling to cope and the situation is likely to worsen as recession takes hold, according to a report by the Prince's Trust. One in 10 16- to 25-year-olds polled by the charity for its Youth Index study said they felt that life was meaningless, and more than a quarter (27%) said they were always or often down or depressed. Almost half of all those surveyed (47%) said they were regularly stressed. The trust, which interviewed more than 2,000 young people across Britain, said the results were "alarming". Young people not in work, training or education were worst affected, the research found. Some 37% of those outside paid employment or education admitted to being frequently down or depressed, while 27% said their lives had no purpose. With young people expected to bear the brunt of job losses over the coming year, the findings are likely to raise concerns among policymakers. Martina Milburn, chief executive of the Prince's Trust, said the study revealed "an increasingly vulnerable generation". Paul Brown, a director at the trust responsible for the research, added: "We already have evidence that young people are likely to be disproportionately affected during a recession. We also know that young people often have problems, especially those without supportive families. That one in 10 young people think their life is not worth living is a really worrying thing to see quantified." Brown said the Prince's Trust, which provides support to about 40,000 young people a year, is introducing a new mental health awareness programme for team leaders in local projects to identify early signs of distress. Peter Kellner, of YouGov, which conducted the research, said the majority of young people had a generally positive outlook on life. He warned, however, that the serious concerns of the "core" of unhappy people under the age of 25 "need to be addressed". He added that failing to take the issue seriously "would be storing up big problems for the future". Concerns about the mental health and wellbeing of young people have risen sharply following reports about the emotional fragility of the current generation of children and teenagers, and problems around violence and knife crime. In April last year the Children's Society's Good Childhood Inquiry, a state-of-the-nation overview of childhood, said in an interim report that more than a quarter (27%) of the 8,000 14- to 16-year-olds it interviewed regularly felt depressed. The inquiry, a two-year rolling programme of research, also reported that just 9% of adults felt children are happier today than when they were growing up. The final report, by Lord Richard Layard, the economist and author of the book Happiness, is due to be published at the end of this month. The Prince's Trust research could raise additional concern because it suggests that the emotional malaise already identified by the Children's Society in younger teenagers is stretching into early adulthood.