Among the many critics of Gordon Brown's letter of condolence to Jacqui Janes, whose 20-year-old son was killed in Helmand, were those whose criticism implied that Brown should not have claimed to be able to empathise with a mother who young adult son had died. After all, his firstborn child had died 10 days after birth, while James Janes was a young man with his adult life ahead of him. Such an attitude shows a complete lack of understanding of how many parents feel about their children. It also shows an ignorance of what happens to many good, obedient children who grow up to be conscientious, self-critical adults. Good people believe that, as they are, they are not good enough. They must work hard to become better but, as much as they try, they can never really succeed. They have set themselves standards that are impossible to reach. Robert Enke was one such person. To become a world-class sportsman or woman, a person has to work unceasingly to become better. There can be no sitting back and taking it easy. The person has to take responsibility for reaching and maintaining the highest standards. Their strictest and most demanding coach is inside their head. Strict, demanding coaches punish failure. If you believe that, as you are, you are not good enough and you have to work hard to be good, that, for you, the only acceptable standard is perfection, you don't need someone else to punish you. You do it to yourself. I have often wondered how many of the injuries Jonny Wilkinson has suffered were him punishing himself. At least Jonny's conscience lets him expiate his sin of not being perfect by enduring a period of suffering. Robert Enke's cruel, punitive conscience told him that he was so wicked he did not deserve to live. When we turn against ourselves and hate ourselves, we create the prison of depression. There is never any point in telling a depressed person who is in the depths of depression that they should not be so hard on themselves. In saying this, you reveal that you do not maintain the high standards that the depressed person does and in which the depressed person takes great pride. Enke must have been told many times that he should take life easy by someone who did not know that his cruel, punitive conscience would become even more so if he dared to rest. Good people with punitive consciences are experts in finding things about which to feel guilty. They cannot accept that there are many events that are the result of chance. When they become parents, they are presented with a cornucopia of things about which to feel guilty. If their baby dies, they blame themselves. Gordon Brown's Presbyterian conscience would have told him to inspect himself and find the fault that led to Jennifer's death. Perhaps he blamed himself for being so old when he became a father. Enke would have heard all the critical voices from his childhood telling him how wicked he was. When the people around Brown and Enke told them that their pain would pass, that they should "come to terms with their loss" and "get on with their life", Brown and Enke would have known that the people around them did not understand what their suffering was. Many parents love their children before they are born. Their death is a loss for which there is no recompense, no reward, but is a loss that must be endured for the rest of their life. Jacqui Janes had other people she could blame for her son's death, but Brown and Enke blamed themselves. Brown saw his task as having to work harder and get things right, while Enke saw himself as not deserving to live. So he walked up the track to welcome the oncoming train.