Ignorance about psychological illness is shockingly common. According to the Department of Health, nearly six out of 10 people think a person with a mental health problem is "someone who has to be kept in a psychiatric or mental hospital" while a third of us believe they should not have the same rights to a job as everyone else. Attitudes like these are exactly the kind that Time To Change, the new lottery-funded advertising campaign to end mental health discrimination, is supposed to counter. But rather than a much-needed fillip for spreading sense, the campaign's first public output reinforces tired old cliches that might actually increase rather than dispel psychological suffering. Last night saw the first airing of TV adverts in which a series of deeply unsympathetic friends, family and colleagues tell an (invisible) victim to stop "wallowing", "take a long, hard look at yourself" and "buck up", followed by a voiceover explaining that for some people "this is too much to bear". On Sunday and Monday, tram passengers in Sheffield will be ushered into a "padded cell" carriage, supposedly to remind them that the one in four people who experience mental health problems don't need to be confined in such a space. Both the advert and the tram stunt perpetuate the negative stereotypes they are presumably designed to tackle. By reinforcing the idea that people in emotional distress can't cheer up, self-reflect or motivate themselves, the advert presents them as passive, helpless victims of their mind state. And if any Sheffield commuters hadn't made a connection between padded cells and mental illness, having the two vividly linked as they travel to work will surely do the trick. I suffered from unremitting depression and anxiety for almost three years, and I wouldn't wish the experience on anyone. But I believe it lasted so long partly because I started to identify as a vulnerable person with an illness, rather than as someone in a predicament who nevertheless could develop the power to recover from it. I labelled myself with a range of diagnoses, isolated myself from "normal" people, took (useless) medication that was a daily confirmation of sickness and sought out various saviours and quack cures. I vented my wrath at anyone who suggested I was hurting myself and those around me, or was in any way responsible for taking charge of my situation. It was only when I stopped behaving like a victim, re-examined my attitudes and took the decision to start seeing myself as a strong, healthy person (even when I don't feel like it) that I began to get well. Politically incorrect though it is to admit, I really did have to "pull myself together" – albeit gently and with kindness, supported by the friends I finally allowed close enough to give me good advice, even if it was sometimes critical and hard to swallow. Of course, shouting at someone for being unhappy or rejecting a capable job candidate because of their past misery is unacceptable, and will probably help create more of the same. But enshrining mental health problems as illnesses over which we are powerless is just as counter-productive – liable not only to solidify the problem as a diagnosis with which we are then stuck, but fuelling the ignorance and prejudices of those who think people who suffer from them are innately lazy or feeble. In one survey, 70% of mental health service users said they had been treated as less competent once their "service user" status was revealed. Interestingly, research suggests that people in mental distress are not only stigmatised by others, but that many of them experience "self-stigma". Perceiving themselves as useless, unwell or crazy, they – not always correctly – anticipate others doing the same. This suggests that some of the people we most need to convince are those with mental health problems themselves. So, instead of a campaign that focuses in on negativity and tired old images of madness, perhaps the rest of the £18m Time To Change lottery cash might be spent on getting across the empowering message that the majority of people who experience a period of mental anguish are, with the right education and support, very capable of learning to manage or recover from their difficulties. Demonstrating that psychological distress can be transcended is surely a much more positive way of tackling stigma than wagging fingers at the ignorant. By combating the misconception that people with mental health problems are entirely helpless victims of their condition, it would not only give the lie to people who want to brand them as permanent failures, but help more people build the confidence to start detaching from their anguish.