According to the mental health charity Rethink, every time the word schizophrenic is incorrectly used to refer to split personalities - in fact multiple personality disorder has nothing to do with schizophrenia - then damage is done. "This kind of language reinforces stereotypes and causes a lot of our members to feel that it is a depiction of them," says the charity's public affairs director Paul Corry. "As a result many stay out of the way of neighbours and friends and feel less confident in walking down the street." Major news networks insist that they always seek to avoid such indiscretions - and to apologise when they occur. "Language and the use of language is a very powerful thing. The BBC's head of newsroom [Mary Hockaday] is committed to not transmitting negative messages through the use of language," says BBC diversity manager Sue Caro. "But when this does happen it is a case of mea culpa. We would like to be perfect but it is not always possible." Alison Walsh, Channel 4's editorial manager for disability, agrees, adding that pundits can be heard making such errors on live programmes while they tend to be edited out of pre-recorded material. UK broadcasters also point to advances being made with onscreen representation of mental health. All the main soaps - Emmerdale, Coronation Street, EastEnders and Hollyoaks - have had a storyline following a character who has some form of mental health issue, most notably with the mental breakdown of the Albert Square's market-stall holder Jean Slater (Gillian Wright) and the later development of bipolar symptoms by the character's daughter Stacey (Lacey Turner); while Coronation Street's Mike Baldwin developed Alzheimer's, and the storyline has been much praised by the Alzheimer's Society. "We have seen in the last couple of years the big soaps, EastEnders and Hollyoaks in particular, showing that they can cover these issues and that they are in it for the long haul with their characters," says Alison Kerry, the head of media at the mental health charity Mind. "Jean and Stacey Slater have been around for a while now and their characters are progressing." Channel 4 airs mainstream dramas such as the adaptation of Poppy Shakespeare, Clare Allan's acclaimed novel about the madness of Britain's psychiatric care services. Another development is the controversial documentary The Bridge, which examined suicides at The Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco. But simple representation of people with mental health issues, or even programmes exploring the subject, are not necessarily enough if not done in the right way, says Rethink. "With the soaps, for example, being dramas they often focus on a dramatic incident rather than following people with mental health problems going about their lives like everybody else," says Corry. "We need more accurate representation." The BBC, which won a Mental Health Media Award in September 2006 for the Slater storyline, points to EastEnders and says that key mental health storylines in its dramas are not necessarily linked to violence and discord. As for behind-the-scenes representation, figures for the number of people with mental health issues employed in the media are unavailable largely because of confidentiality issues. But many mental health professionals have welcomed the emergence of prominent - and indeed successful - figures such as Stephen Fry, Paul Abbott and Ruby Wax publicly discussing their personal mental health battles. "Programmes like those showing Stephen Fry talking frankly about his experiences help remove some of the stigma that still surrounds mental health issues and demonstrate they can affect anyone." Hamida Ali, a BBC diversity manager, is also full of praise for the corporation's Headroom campaign, which was "about exploring different aspects of mental health" and "which has led to a number of BBC programmes which have helped to raise awareness of mental health issues and to de-stigmatise them through TV programmes, website, helpline and outreach at festivals, in libraries and student unions." Rethink is aware of the stigma towards people with mental health issues in comedy (for example Anne, a patient at a psychiatric hospital, in Little Britain). But it's also wary of adopting a "killjoy attitude" and cites the work of a number of comedians in raising money for mental health charities. "People who have worked on psychiatric wards have come up with some great comedy that comes out of the bigger things that have happened," adds Corry. However, one area of major concern for the charity is newspaper representation. In 2006 an Institute of Psychiatry study of newspaper coverage found that 64% of psychiatric stories were negative compared with 46% of general medical pieces. The use of words like "crazy" and "lunatic" is quite common, claims Rethink. "The PCC does not take seriously enough the derogatory nature of media reporting of people with mental health problems," adds Corry. • This article was amended on 24 November 2009. The original referred to a fictional character in Little Britain as "an inmate" at a psychiatric hospital. This has been corrected.