A flagship government strategy to train an army of therapists to get the nation off antidepressants and into work could be dramatically scaled back amid claims it is experiencing problems. The government claims the Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (Iapt) programme will treat 900,000 people and help about half of them to make a full recovery. It also aims to get 25,000 people suffering from anxiety and depression off sick pay and benefits by 2010/11. But the Observer understands there are now concerns about whether these targets can be met. The Iapt Expert Reference Group – the body that oversees the implementation of the programme – was told last month that only 400 out of the 3,600 therapists needed to run it are fully trained. Only 2,000 patients who have completed a course have so far come off benefits, suggesting the target of 25,000 by 2010/11 will be difficult to achieve. A number of core staff responsible for its roll-out have been asked to reapply for their jobs. It has also emerged that the lion's share of the £173m budget for the programme will not be ringfenced as mental health experts had originally believed. Instead the remaining £100m yet to be allocated will be spent however NHS trusts choose. Experts said that in the jaws of a recession this will "inevitably" mean the money will be transferred from the programme to other more "visible" frontline NHS services, a move that will have a drastic impact on its efficacy. The possibility is likely to dismay the programme's supporters who believe it offers a vital alternative to the tens of millions of antidepressants, such as Seroxat and Prozac, that are prescribed by doctors in the UK every year. Using Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT), which helps people challenge negative thought patterns, the programme, which will run until 2011, has been heavily promoted by the government as an antidote to "Sicknote Britain". Around 15% of the population suffers from depression or anxiety. The two cost the UK taxpayer some £12bn a year and some million people are off work and claiming benefits because of mental health problems. Professor Lord Richard Layard, a former government adviser whose 2006 report on depression was instrumental in establishing the programme, has claimed that, after fewer than 16 CBT sessions, at least half of people with depression or clinical anxiety will see significant improvement in their mental health. The programme was recently expanded to help people who have lost their jobs during the recession. But a special hotline set up to offer counselling to them is receiving only about 25 calls a month because few people are aware of its existence. "Iapt is a great idea whose implementation seems to have gone wrong," said David Pink, chief executive officer of the UK Council for Psychotherapy, which has argued for the scheme to be expanded to include more forms of therapy. "Now there is a danger it no longer seems to be improving access to psychological therapies." Norman Lamb, the Liberal Democrats' health spokesman, said it was "utterly outrageous" that the government did not intend to protect the programme's budget. "It will inevitably be curtailed as a result," he said. "The same thing will happen this time round as in the last recession – mental health will lose out because it's an easy target." Insiders blamed the way the programme had been introduced for some of its "teething" problems. There has also been confusion over how NHS trusts are recording their performance. Last month the Department of Health issued them with new guidance on targets, the fourth time it has done so. One person familiar with the programme said it did little to encourage a relationship between practitioner and patient and that "some patients ended up spending more time filling in forms than being with someone". A spokeswoman for the Department of Health said: "In its initial stages, much of the Iapt programme funding was allocated centrally, but as the service becomes better established we are discussing how best to make the change to more conventional arrangements."