Jeffrey Sachs, the Earth Institute, Columbia University Governments believe that short, sharp stimulus packages will restore growth - but they are wrong. Instead they must overhaul the world economy by building an infrastructure for the 21st century. This includes more renewable energy; fibre and wireless networks that carry telephony and broadband internet; more efficient water, irrigation and sewage systems; urban and inter-city public transit systems; safer roads, and protected natural areas that conserve biodiversity and the habitats of threatened species. To achieve these goals, governments must strengthen ministries to enable them to design and deliver large-scale projects. The ability to offset the crisis in a constructive manner through expanded public-private partnerships will determine the subsequent success of countries and regions. Action that does not include the developing world will end in failure. Developed countries will have to do more to help the poor - for example, with more financial aid for sustainable infrastructure projects paid for by loans and investment from the World Bank and regional development banks. Nariman Behravesh, IHS Global Insight G20 should jump-start global growth. The US and China have done a lot. Europe and Japan need to do much more, especially in terms of fiscal stimulus. This ought to be the top priority of the G20. Without a sustained recovery, the other agenda items will be moot. Avoid protectionism. The US should avoid repeating the mistakes made during the great depression and set a good example, but Europe and Asia also need to avoid succumbing to the temptation. Boost the resources of the International Monetary Fund, so that it can help those countries (mostly in emerging Europe) that face the highest risk of sovereign default. Enact smart rather than more regulation. The world financial system has not suffered because of a lack of regulation, but because of a failure to enforce existing regulations. Contrary to popular myths, the current crisis was not so much caused by the "shadow" banks (hedge funds, private equity etc) as the heavily regulated commercial banks. Gerard Lyons, Standard Chartered The west has lost the moral authority to tell others what to do and needs to put its own house in order. The danger is that this triggers excessive regulation and reduces the credit that drives trade and investment. Emerging economies were not the problem, yet they are part of the solution. Led by China they need to rise to the challenge and commit to saving less, spending more. Jobs, poverty and trust are the key issues. The G20 needs to act, as this crisis is far from over. Commit to further policy stimulus to boost demand and prevent unemployment rising. Commit to financing trade as poorer countries need both this and access to markets to stop poverty returning. Commit to sensible regulation and complete transparency to regain trust and get lending flowing. Imbalances in the global economy and a systemic collapse in the financial system caused this crisis. The G20 must put in place steps to limit the recession and move us to a future where the world economy is balanced and the financial system fixed. Heiner Flassbeck, Unctad (UN trade and development arm) In the short term, we need aggressive action. I'm with Ben Bernanke [the Federal Reserve chairman] on this, with his aggressive approach, because there is such a danger that we run into a deflationary situation. One should not forget the great depression, and that the way we got out of it was a world war. Germany, Japan and China have to do more. The overindebted countries cannot do it. But the G20 must also close down the casino, and put financial markets back in the hands of governments. There are people waiting in the City of London to get back to the gambling game. Governments have said, we won't intervene, let the market decide – but they have to realise they are as informed as any other market participants. We need more data, more information about commodity markets. At the same time, we need to control currency markets – we need exchange rates to be fixed, but adjustable. Otherwise, with free capital flows, you get into a game, with people gambling on inflation and interest rates. Alistair Milne, Cass Business School What we need from the G20 is agreement to go on a credit buying spree, on behalf of taxpayers. Excessive pessimism has led to a fall in market prices for credit and equity far below any sensible valuation. Governments should take advantage of low market prices, make money buying banks and underpriced bank assets, and hence reverse the downward spiral of credit contraction. For example, the US government investment of $150bn (£100bn) supporting the insurer AIG is held out as a means of preventing systemic risk or saving banks. The real reason is that buying AIG exposures and holding long term is a total steal for US taxpayers. Eventually, held to maturity, all the money will come back (because these losses just reflect meaningless declines in market prices) and so US taxpayers get ownership of a huge and profitable insurer, worth at least $25bn, for nothing. Bravo. There are, of course, a few challenging long-term structural adjustments to sort out as well (renminbi appreciation, anyone?). But in the meantime, governments should be making a profit to prepare for the difficult years ahead. Kevin Watkins, United Nations G20 leaders should devote their attention to two things. First, they need to agree practical strategies to protect Africa from the economic meltdown. Countries across the region are being hit by a lethal combination of slower growth, falling commodity prices and rising budget deficits. There is now a real danger that fragile gains in poverty reduction, health and education will be thrown into reverse gear. What Africa needs is an injection of financial support so that governments can provide a fiscal stimulus to protect vulnerable people. The G20 could agree to scale-up concessional financial support through the IMF and the World Bank, making around $140bn available. For good measure, the summit could set a deadline for the G8 leaders to deliver on the backlog of $13bn in undelivered aid for the region. The second priority is climate change. Here the G20 leaders should agree to create a global financing mechanism through which rich countries finance the transfer of low-carbon technologies to poor countries. While they are at it, developed country leaders should agree to mobilise $100bn for a climate change adaptation fund to protect the world's poorest people.