Huddersfield Giants' former New Zealand international Paul Whatuira is being assessed in a secure mental health institute in Bradford after being arrested over alleged attacks on two men in the early hours of Tuesday morning. The 28-year-old centre was initially taken to Huddersfield police station but has since been moved to a hospital in Bradford before any charges are laid. It has emerged that Whatuira, who was a member of the Giants side that reached the Challenge Cup final against Warrington this year, was a patient at St Luke's hospital in Crosland Moor when he left the hospital early on Tuesday morning. It is not known at this stage why he was there. At around 6am on Tuesday morning a man walking from a car park on St Thomas' Road to the engineering firm TWL was attacked on the road. A spokesman for the company has described the incident as "an unprovoked attack", and added that the man suffered a broken nose, missing front teeth and other severe dental problems. The man was taken to Huddersfield Royal infirmary and was detained overnight before being allowed to leave yesterday, according to the Huddersfield Daily Examiner. Another man was then attacked on the same road, but is not believed to have been badly hurt. It is understood that Whatuira was then arrested after a struggle with police officers. A West Yorkshire police spokesman said: "Officers arrested a 28-year-old man after reports of two assaults outside premises on St Thomas' Road in Huddersfield. The man was taken into custody and then bailed to undergo a mental health assessment.'' Huddersfield Giants have stated that Whatuira and his family will have the full medical support of the club available to them. "I would ask that everyone respects the importance in this instance of confidentiality and understands that the club is upholding its duty of care to provide the best possible environment to help Paul," the club's managing director, Richard Thewlis, added. Whatuira, who has been capped 16 times by New Zealand, joined the club having won the Australian Grand Final with Wests Tigers. He also played with New Zealand Warriors, Melbourne Storm and Penrith Panthers in the NRL, and last season scored 15 tries in 28 games for Huddersfield.