Bullet points just don't work. We've all chewed our fists in frustration as the 150th bullet appears in a presentation. We've all felt our hearts sink when faced with another report crammed with black dots. Bullets don't impress people; they depress people. Are bullet points really to blame, though? We don't blame the biro if people write badly. But biros help people write without hindering their ability to write well; bullets hinder because they lack structure. They seem to encourage flabby thinking and writing, and are poor at lifting key points from the page. People think bullets break up dull text. They don't: they are themselves dull text. This all leads to bad decisions. Apparently, managers often use intuition to reach decisions, and then look selectively at information to support their hunch. I'm not surprised: they can't make sense of the bullet-riddled nonsense they're sent. In the movie When Harry Met Sally, Meg Ryan made the head spin when ordering dessert. In today's bullet-obsessed world, someone would "helpfully clarify" her words by doing them in bullets: • But I'd like the pie heated, and I don't want the ice cream on top. I want it on the side. • And I'd like strawberry instead of vanilla, if you have it • If not, then no ice cream, just whipped cream - but only if it's real • If it's out of a can, then just the pie, but then not heated. If you think bullets aren't this bad in real life, you're right: often, they are worse. Many people wouldn't even do these four bullets. Instead, they'd proclaim: "I've highlighted the key dessert issues for us to talk through when we meet:" • Cream: real or out of can? • Ice cream: strawberry or vanilla? • Position of cream or ice cream: on top on side? • Pie: hot or cold? It's lazy thinking because the bullets don't think through the interrelationships between alternatives nor relate them to outcomes. As I said, dots are for Dalmatians, not documents. But what are the alternatives to bullets? Actually, there are quite a lot. Here are just a few examples. In slides, imagery is a popular alternative, but it isn't effective in reports. Your report can't just be 20 pictures: any serious alternative to bullets must cope with words and detail. So if your situation is of the "if this, then that; if that, then the other" variety (like Meg's), then maybe try a decision tree. If you're reviewing pros and cons or alternatives, try a comparison table, like the ones they do in Which? magazine. And for day-to-day text or slides, try Words in Tables, my alternative to bullets. I do appreciate that I could have done the above paragraph as a decision tree. Bullet points have a lot to answer for. I won't claim that bullets caused the credit crunch, but I will say that they played their part in failing to stop it. So, in the interests of clarity, impact and better decisions, please join my campaign to Make Work Pointless.