People who eat a diet laden with processed and high-fat foods are significantly more likely to get depressed, according to new research. The study, published this week in the British Journal of Psychiatry, is the first to examine the association between overall diet and depression. It found that people who ate a diet high in Mediterranean-style foods, such as pulses, fruits, nuts, cereals, fish and olive oil were 30% less likely to develop depression than those who ate less healthy foods. Researchers from University College, London studied 3,486 participants from the "Whitehall II" study over five years. The participants had an average age of 55, and worked in civil service departments in London. Each answered questions about their eating habits and completed a self-assessment for depression. Those who reported suffering depressive symptoms were more likely to have a high consumption of sweetened desserts, fried foods, processed meats, refined grains and high-fat dairy products. These associations held true even after the researchers had adjusted the findings to take account of other indicators of a healthy lifestyle, such as not smoking, taking physical activity and a healthy body mass. "Our results suggest that consuming fruits, vegetables and fish may afford protection against the onset of depressive symptoms," said Dr Tasnime Akbaraly, co-author of the report and a nutritional epidemiologist in the Department of Epidemiology and Public Health at UCL. Previous studies suggested that high levels of antioxidants, which exist in fruits and vegetables, could protect against depression, she said. Folate, which is found in large amounts in vegetables such as broccoli, cabbage and spinach, and foods such as lentils and chickpeas, may have the same effect. Akbaraly argued that fish could protect against depression because of its high levels of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids: a major component of neuron membranes in the brain. Dr Archana Singh-Manoux, from UCL's division of population health and co-author of the report, said that further research was needed to explain why eating processed food is associated with higher risk of depression. "It could be because a processed food diet is associated with a higher risk of coronary heart disease and inflammation, which are known to be involved in the development of depression," she said. Dr Lynn Harbottle, from the Mental Health Group of the British Dietetic Association, said: "This is particularly relevant for people recovering from mild or moderate depression, who might not realise that simply by making changes to their diet they can help improve their mood."