A therapeutic programme hailed by ministers as a hi-tech, cost-effective solution to Britain's growing problem of depression and anxiety has been widely ignored by the NHS, leaving hundreds of thousands of people without access to treatment. Two years after its launch, computerised cognitive behavioural therapy (cCBT) is available in only a fraction of health authorities in England despite being approved for widespread NHS use by the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (Nice), it has emerged. Opposition politicians and charities have accused the government of creating a postcode lottery. Just nine of 152 primary care trusts (PCTs) have fully complied with official guidance requiring them to offer cCBT, while 38 have failed to comply at all according to figures supplied by the designers of the programme. The programme, Beating the Blues, is a computer-based version of face-to-face cognitive behavioural therapy, recognised by Nice as an effective alternative treatment to expensive prescribed medication for many people. In some cases it may prevent the need for more costly, time-consuming face-to-face therapy sessions. MPs and Lords including Lord Howe, Baroness Tonge and Liberal Democrat health spokesman Norman Lamb, who has tabled an early day motion (EDM) on the issue, have called on the government to explain its apparent failure to roll the programme out nationally. John Smith, director of Ultrasis, the company which designed Beating the Blues, claimed the government has been "taking credit" for a policy whose implementation it has failed to ensure, leaving potentially hundreds of thousands of people without access to the treatment they were promised. He says that while ministers have publicly endorsed cCBT - the latest was Dawn Primarolo, minister for public health during parliamentary questions in December last year when she called it "integral" to the government's wider 'talking therapies' programme - there has been "official inertia" when it comes to implementation. "I don't think the government have chased PCTs up on this," Smith said. He added that cCBT could cost as little as £30 per session and potentially save the NHS millions every year. "If the Nice binding guidance was followed there would be a cost benefit to the NHS of £126m a year." Heralded by the Department of Health (DH) in May 2007 as "one of the greatest technological innovations of the decade" cCBT was introduced as part of the government's much-publicised broad package of reforms to widen the availability of "talking therapies" including face-to-face cognitive behavioural therapy on the NHS. Talking therapies shot up the government's agenda after Lord Layard, a London School of Economics professor and author of the book Happiness, claimed that mental health was the country's "biggest social problem", and convinced Number 10 that the widespread introduction of psychological therapies would have significant economic as well as health benefits. Lamb said ministers need to take an urgent look at how cCBT has been implemented and establish a clear picture of variations of provision across the country. "I think its intolerable that this treatment, which has been approved by Nice, is not available in many parts of the country," Lamb said. "This is a proven, cost-effective treatment. Its another example of mental health not being a priority in the same way as physical health. "The government's rhetoric on this is brilliant but it doesn't match what's happening on the ground." Sophie Corlett, the director of external relations at mental health charity Mind, said: "Nice has made mandatory recommendations that cCBT should be offered to people with mild depression and anxiety and as yet this guidance has been largely ignored. PCTs are failing the millions of people who could benefit from this treatment." The DH said cCBT implementation data was not held by central government and the treatment was just one part of a broader commitment to talking therapies. The care services minister, Phil Hope said there were no grounds for suggesting that cCBT was not a priority. "Primary care trusts are obliged to provide funding for Nice-recommended cCBT packages where clinicians want to use them. "We expect that PCT's will roll out this service according to local needs, but clinicians are best placed to decide what treatments to use for their patients."