Three survivors of appalling childhood abuse were last night honoured with the Speaking Out award at the Mental Health Media Awards ceremony. Alastair Rolfe, Mark Payge and Tom Perry received the award as a result of their courageous accounts of repetitive childhood sexual abuse, which featured in a Bafta-winning documentary, Chosen. The men, now middle-aged, each experienced the abuse at Caldicott private school in Buckinghamshire at the hands of three different male teachers. The experience and aftermath of abuse has, according to Rolfe, taken "a huge personal toll". However, breaking his 30-year-silence in the documentary film, he says, was not without reason. "If I could stop this happening to one child, it would all be worth it," he says. It is only since making Chosen that Rolfe feels he has faced up to the fallout from his abuse. "That an outwardly confident, successful, middle-aged man should still be facing a daily, inward struggle with the effects of sexual abuse 30 years later is an indication of the power it can have over you," he explains. Payge says that opening up has been hugely cathartic. "You tend to be as sick as your secrets," he says. "Chosen gave me the very public opportunity to push through that barrier and to communicate a powerful message – that it really is OK, no matter how difficult it may seem to speak out, and release yourself from the stranglehold of excruciating memories. The pain of the past had kept me a prisoner of dysfunction right through my adult life. The documentary has helped release me in a redemptive way from the abuse." Payge adds that winning the Speaking Out award has proved to him that "out of the wreckage of the past, something profound has happened which proves that it is never too late to change." For Perry, the opportunity to free himself from the stranglehold of silence that abusers have over their victims has transformed his life. "Since speaking about the abuse I have experienced a significant change," he says. "My mental health has improved and I now feel that I am out of that dreadful hole looking down at it. I am very proud of my contribution to the documentary." Perry now campaigns for the improvement of child protection. Successes include the announcement of the Singleton review into safeguarding in independent schools, which Perry contributed to. Public reaction to the documentary, which was screened last year on More4, has been overwhelmingly supportive. The Mental Health Media Awards, run by the charity Mind, celebrate the best portrayal of mental distress and reporting of mental health in broadcast media. Chair of the judges, Eric Appleby, says: "It is through the frankly heroic telling of stories such as this that we can begin to beat the stigma that is so unfairly attached to those who have experienced mental distress as a result of such abuse." As for Perry, he says: "Winning the award is the greatest compliment because it means someone noticed."