Two days in at Art Basel Miami Beach, the weather alternates between windy sunshine and cloudy chill, once again mirroring conditions inside the fair. With 250 galleries showcasing their wares, it also felt more serious: instead of the throwaway collages, doodles and visual puns that have peppered art fairs in recent years were works real quality. Commenting on the recession was a topical theme. Düsseldorf's Sies &amp; Hoke gallery exhibited just one piece, For Whom … by Kris Martin, a 15-foot tall bell baptised in 1929 – the year of the Great Depression, you'll note – but with the clapper removed. This silent symbol found its peace compromised, however, by the neighbouring XL gallery's installation of a Styrofoam audience watching the lines and circles of Malevich compositions make love to a porno soundtrack (the work was by Sergey Shekhovstov and Alex Buldakov). Nearby, Guangzhou's Vitamin Creative Space unveiled a booth consisting only of enlarged screen grabs by Zhang Guogo of Merryl Lynch and Lehman Brothers bankers clearing their desks. It felt a bit like gloating. The US, however, had a reply. Matthew Higgs, being the supreme salesman he is, sold all the works from his White Column's gallery within an hour of opening, and the Gagosian likewise sold all its Ed Ruscha paintings within a similar timeframe. The wall space they once occupied were promptly replaced by heavyweight Richard Princes, both paintings and prints from the artist's recent Canal Zone series of Rastafarians and pin-up girls frolicking in the Panamanian undergrowth. These came with a $600,000 price tag, though one Gagosian staffer confided that an offer of 20 percent less would probably seal the deal. It was a buyer's market. One of the most interesting issues at stake was how emerging artists will fare. East London's Hotel gallery, having paid $18,600 for their booth, were philosophical. Having been the talk of the town when they were last at the fair in 2006, literally selling out within minutes, co-director Christabel Stewart admitted that "it's not the frenzy it was before. Miami is the home of hype, and it's quite appropriate it ends here." Her colleague Darren Flook agreed: "The credit crunch will benefit work that takes digesting." It's an issue also recognized by the new fair director Mark Spiegel, who extended the VIP preview by a day to allow collectors more time to browse in peace. Later, at a cocktail party to celebrate the new Marcel Wanders-designed Mondrian hotel, bartenders wore t-shirts emblazoned with the slogan RECESSISON. A bit crass, perhaps, but at least they could mix a mean mohito. Over at the gardens of the Raleigh hotel, Deitch Projects threw another of their famous parties, this time with Arkansas disco-punk trio the Gossip ranting about Republicans and money before breaking into an intricately choreographed set. French hip-hop singer Yelle played a free gig on the beach and the Sagamore hotel hosted a party for Olaf Breuning's Klee-inspired bikini babe sandcastle. The hot ticket, though, was a word-of-mouth invitation to see Grace Jones perform at the Delano hotel's Lenny Kravitz-designed Florida Rooms. Dressed in rubber and with tears streaming down her face – no one knew quite why – she ran through various tracks of her new album before ending with a raucous rendition of Pull Up To the Bumper. With an audience of Ivana Trump, Mary-Kate Olsen and the Miami-bred Marilyn Manson sat at adjacent tables, it felt even more like fantasy.