People with mental health problems will receive extra support to manage their conditions and help them hold on to their jobs, the government announced today. A series of pilot schemes has proved successful in supporting people with fluctuating mental health conditions in the workplace. Following these trials, the government will consider extending the support on offer, said the welfare minister, Jim Knight. A national strategy for mental health and employment will detail expectations of employers, healthcare professionals, organisations and individuals in improving wellbeing in the workplace. Ministers have asked a mental health expert, Dr Rachel Perkins, and Paul Farmer, the chief executive of the mental health charity Mind, to provide fresh ideas on how to help people with mental health problems get back into work. Other proposals include a network of mental health experts across Jobcentre Plus, to work with colleagues in the health system to co-ordinate support for people with mental health conditions, and a consultation on Right to Control, which will give disabled people, including those with mental health problems, greater choice over how public money is spent to meet their needs. The Access to Work fund will be doubled, from £69m to £138m, over the next five years. Sophie Corlett, Mind's director of external relations, said: "If employers put their mind to it and provide the right support, they can keep their staff mentally well and fit for the workplace. "People with mental health problems want to work, but are often failed by employers who lack the understanding or the skills to provide the necessary support. "We welcome the government's increased investment in mental health, particularly during these difficult economic times; now more than ever, people need the support and understanding of their employers." Knight said: "I know disabled people dearly want to stay in work and their employers want to do everything they can to keep good staff. Our plans to offer the right help early on can end the downward spiral of people falling out of work, into sick leave, and on to benefits. "We are all agreed that helping people stay in work is good news for them, their bosses and the taxpayer."