A Northern Ireland MP, who made headlines last year for her anti-gay remarks, yesterday said she was suffering from serious depression and cited ill health as a reason for leaving public life. Iris Robinson was elected as a Democratic Unionist MP for Strangford in 2001. She is the wife of Northern Ireland's first minister, Peter Robinson, and said she had discussed with him over Christmas her decision to stand down, after a recent operation. She attracted criticism after saying she believed homosexuality was an abomination which made her feel sick. Her remarks came barely a day after a gay man was killed in a homophobic attack. In a statement, Mrs Robinson, 60, said that standing down as an MP and member of the Stormont assembly was the right thing to do because of her ill health. "Over the years, I have undergone a long series of operations and, though I have never talked about it publicly, I have also battled against serious bouts of depression. "Only those who have faced similar challenges in life will know the ordeal faced by those who are profoundly depressed, and the distress caused to those around them as they grapple with personality-changing illness. One in four of the population struggle with mental illnesses at one level or another, yet few talk about it openly. "The stress and strain of public life comes at a cost and my health has suffered. Regrettably, I have concluded, after considering the matter over Christmas and discussing it with Peter, who has always been most supportive and caring, that I can no longer maintain the high standard of service I require of myself, meet the demands of office and cope with the pressures of public life, without my health deteriorating further." Mrs Robinson, who has three children was also caught up in the MPs' expenses scandal. Records showed the Robinsons received more than £500,000 a year in salaries and expenses, while a further £150,000 in wages was paid to four relatives – including their daughter Rebekah and son Gareth – for constituency and other work. The Northern Ireland secretary, Shaun Woodward, praised Mrs Robinson's public service: "Iris's decision to share with the public her reasons for standing down will also help many other people and their families who live with the challenge and problems of coping with depression."