Life inside the square mile has been tough recently; we have heard that traders and bankers are suffering real mental distress. City workers are flocking to private clinics for emerging mental health problems and addictions. They do have my sympathy. But those outside the City aren't immune to "recession depression". For the less well-off there really is a "trickle-down effect" from the top – a steady stream of job losses, home repossessions and high-cost debt. There's plenty of evidence that stressful life events like losing your home have a profound impact on your mental wellbeing, so I wasn't that surprised when my organisation, Rethink, got the results back from a survey on life events that damage mental health. Nearly half of us say getting our home repossessed would damage us mentally. Worryingly, repossessions are soaring; thousands of us could be facing this ultimate stressor and struggling with the consequences – anxiety, depression, or a severe mental illness like schizophrenia. Mental health charities like mine are inevitably concerned for those already mentally ill or in recovery. And that's a lot of people – the Office for National Statistics says 1 in 4 of us will have a mental health problem at some stage. For those already vulnerable losing a home could trigger a relapse. I wouldn't be surprised if we see a big rise in people seeing their doctor about mental health issues, whether those problems are new or existing. And at last I'm not the only one saying it, as just this week the World Health Organisation (WHO) echoed Rethink's concerns. But what help can these credit crunch victims expect? Mental health services are already stretched to capacity. When Rethink surveyed its members recently, 68% weren't even getting the psychological therapies recommended by the National Institute for Clinical Excellence. This week the WHO told us England's mental health services are the best in Europe, but don't be fooled into thinking that's the whole story. Measuring your health service by comparing it with other countries is not that helpful. More instructive is a comparison between our services for the physically and mentally unwell. The reality is if you've got a mental illness you'll get 10 times less spent on your care than someone with cancer. You'll probably wait longer for treatment, be treated on a shabbier ward and get a stigmatising label for your trouble. There's no doubt we've come a long way since the bad old days when we locked people up in asylums, but there's a long way to go before we can feel as though the problems are solved. I've been saying we need to plough more money into mental health services for a long time – but now they're facing rising demand in response to the financial meltdown I think it's time to start shouting it from the rooftops.