Boring, revealing, damning or reassuring; statistics can mean many things to different people. For Gareth Southgate and Middlesbrough, though, they simply spell depression. It is now 14 games since Southgate's side won a Premier League fixture, and they have scored just once in their last nine matches. Small wonder that, as relegation beckons, hitherto loyal Teessider's are starting to question Southgate's job security, and greeted the final whistle of this goalless home draw against Wigan with resounding boos. The game was delayed for several first-half minutes in the wake of a hefty, wince-inducingly, old-school tackle on Didier Digard by Lee Cattermole. Ironically bought as Cattermole's replacement when Gareth Southgate sold the latter to Wigan last summer, Digard required oxygen on the pitch and left it on a stretcher with a leg in a brace. The Frenchman was then immediately dispatched to hospital for scans on his damaged thigh. Although Cattermole got the ball and the challenge was adjudged legal by referee Mike Dean, in following through the Wigan midfielder also took out Digard. Maybe it was simply unlucky, but Boro were not about to give their former employee the benefit of the doubt, and it was no surprise when angry exchanges between the two benches ensued. Similarly, the crowd's applause certainly echoed to the rafters when Cattermole was finally booked for a snide little nudge on Julio Arca. Everyone thought Cattermole was off when Afonso Alves collapsed as their paths crossed but replays showed that the Brazilian had dived quite shamelessly. He was rightly yellow-carded. Despite their plight, Southgate had pledged that Boro would play with freedom rather than fear and, sure enough, they treated an empty-seat studded Riverside to an entertainingly open, sometimes almost helter skeleter, end to end encounter. Even so, clear cut chances – after all Boro had only scored once in their previous eight League games – were at a premium, and Wigan probably enjoyed the best first-half opening when Brad Jones did well to repel Charles N'Zogbia's curling, left-footed free-kick. Much to Boro's chagrin Cattermole – who can actually play a bit – took an ever increasing grip on midfield in the second period, and Michael Brown sent a volley flashing narrowly wide. Although substitute Hugo Rodallega missed a presentable, if tricky, chance, it was, however, a rare visiting scoring opportunity. Perhaps pining for the departed Emile Heskey, Amr Zaki has lost his early-season sparkle and the disappointing Egyptian was eventually replaced by Antoine Sibierski. Even though Mario Melchiot made an important block to deny Stewart Downing, Boro were, all too typically, less than incisive in the penalty area. It is a trait that threatens to consign them to the Championship next season.