Prozac no relief for Bioglan depression
Unhappy Britons have been able to buy cheaper pick-me-up pills since January, when the popular antidepressant Prozac lost its UK patent protection.

2 min. readView original
Unhappy Britons have been able to buy cheaper pick-me-up pills since January, when the popular antidepressant Prozac lost its UK patent protection.

A glut of companies leapt into the market with cut-price versions of the drug. Leading the way was Hertfordshire-based Bioglan Pharma, which got its version of Prozac into pharmacies within 24 hours of the liberalisation.

That produced a pleasing blip in Bioglan's annual sales, even though the company's financial year ended just two weeks later. However, the company came in for some flak in the City yesterday, when its full results were made public.

As well as selling generic drugs, Bioglan specialises in developing dermatology treatments - for problems such as acne, psoriasis and eczema. The company's pre-tax profits doubled to £7m but this included licensing income of £9m from a US group, Winston Laboratories. This was under the terms of a deal in December, when Bioglan raised £24m from shareholders to buy 19% of Winston.

It emerged yesterday that without the Winston transaction, Bioglan would have made a loss because of a largely unexplained slump in European sales of its skin drugs during the second half of the year.

John Savin, an analyst at Greig Middleton, said: "My suspicion is that they were having a major slowdown and the Winston deal was an opportunity to rescue profits."

Bioglan's shares, which have been riding high for most of the year, slumped 71p to 587p on the news. Chief executive Terry Sadler has responded to recent events by stepping up research and development spending - he has increased this year's budget from £6.7m to £10.6m. This means profits will suffer in the short-term but it should pay off with new products further ahead.

Bioglan is working on drug discovery technology - its expertise is in taking medicines which are difficult to dissolve and altering their chemical make-up to get them into creams. Using this technique, the group has been able to make easy-to-apply versions of many widely used skin treatments.

In the past, Bioglan has been a notable success story. Mr Sadler bought the business in 1984 for £176,000, raising part of the money by borrowing £30,000 on three gold credit cards. The group's market value is now £550m and Mr Sadler's 40% stake is worth nearly £200m.

Bioglan's house broker, HSBC Securities, believe profits will recover to £9m this year. But just a couple of months ago, Bioglan's shares were changing hands for more than 900p. It will take more than a few pills to push the price that high again.