Prudential defied falling stockmarkets today to lead the FTSE 100 risers after the insurance company insisted it had put enough money aside to withstand a decade-long repeat of the Great Depression. At a time of concern about the fragility about the financial system, Prudential tried to demonstrate that it had a "strong and robust" capital position. The City was impressed, sending its share price 11% higher to 285p, a 28.5p gain. The shares were one of the few to rise on a day when the FTSE 100 of leading shares fell below the crucial 4,000 level amid deepening gloom about the state of the economy. Prudential took a number of actions to bolster its financial strength, which included: • transferring the assets and liabilities of its agency distribution business in Taiwan which increased its capital surplus by £800m. • entering an agreement with the Financial Services Authority to add £300m to the capital surplus through an intricate arrangement involving the UK with-profits fund. In total the capital surplus - known as the insurance groups directive (IGD) surplus - was £1.7bn, before the payment of any dividend which will be announced next month. Mark Tucker, chief executive of Prudential, highlighted the UK shareholder annuity funds which had built up a "significant" credit reserve of £1.4bn to allow for future defaults. This reserve is enough for the fund to withstand the equivalent of the average default experience during the Great Depression taking place during every year of the life of the fund. Anxiety about the financial position of fellow insurer L&amp;G has been gathering in recent days. Earlier this week it was forced to put out an unscheduled statement explaining that it is increasing its reserves against corporate bonds defaults. Analysts at Keefe Bruyette &amp; Woods noted Pru was "reserving at the top of its peer group range". "Management is reserving 80 basis points per annum for defaults on its £17bn UK annuity book, which compares to the 68bps announced by L&amp;G," the KBW analysts said. Acknowledging that the IDG surplus was strong, KBW said: "We estimate that a '1929' style event would cost the group around £1bn in impairments over the next four years." Prudential, which had in the past faced pressure from investors to split itself into three along geographic areas of the UK, the US and Asia, reported a 5% rise in insurance sales to £3bn. Sales in Asia, the traditional power house of the business, rose 6% while the US business known as Jackson Life achieved a record performance by rising 7% to £716m.