The overriding duty of economic policymakers is not to make serious mistakes. In an ideal world they would not make minor mistakes, but we are all human, including prime ministers, finance ministers, central bank governors, and assorted politicians and officials. The present generation of policymakers is haunted by the mistakes made by its predecessors in the 1920s and 1930s. It stands to reason, as people used to say in my youth, that mistakes were made in subsequent decades. But since this has been – and still is – the biggest recession since 1929-32, it is understandable that so many of us should be comparing and contrasting then and now. Indeed, one of the many plus points on the CV of Ben Bernanke, the present chairman of the US Federal Board, is that he made his name in academia with his study of the Great Depression. The sins of the central bankers of the 1920s and 1930s are superbly chronicled in Liaquat Ahamed's Lords of Finance, a book I commend to all and sundry. I refer of course to sins of omission and commission in economic policy, not to private life, although there is also plenty of "human interest" in Lords of Finance. There is, I fear, a serious sin of commission in the pipeline, which could abort the long-awaited – and still, to my mind, not yet with us – British economic recovery. I refer to the opposition's threats to make sweeping cuts in public spending. But first let us deal with the so-called recovery, which seems to have been "talked up" last week by media interpretation of the latest Bank of England inflation report. Your correspondent has to confess that he emerged from Mervyn King's press conference with a rather different interpretation of the Bank's position from the one the public seems to have received from the media. The news reports were what is known in the trade as "upbeat", but the tone of King's interpretation of the Bank's quarterly report – and the governor speaks on these occasions for all nine Bank and external members of the monetary policy committee – was decidedly circumspect. When I read the full report later, I could see why. The extent of the recession is borne out by statistics showing that business investment fell sharply by 8.9% in the first quarter and an even sharper 10.2% in the second, while "the level of consumer spending has fallen by 3.7% since the start of the recession and is much further below the level implied by a continuation of its pre-recession trends". (I do not recall anything quite like such decreases in consumer spending during the recessions of the early 1980s and the early 1990s.) Of course, what matters is where we go from here. The "optimistic" reports were based largely on minor upward revisions to the Bank's forecasts of gross domestic product for the next two years. But, as King pointed out, "small movements in quarterly growth rates will not alter the extent of the challenges now facing the economy, such as the scale of the fall in output over the past 18 months". He continued: "The UK economy is facing a prolonged period of balance sheet adjustment… The banking system is reducing its leverage from extraordinarily high levels. Until that has taken place, the supply of credit to households and businesses will be impeded. Those same households and businesses are re-evaluating their own financial positions – looking to build up their savings in the face of uncertain incomes and profits." The optimistic interpretation may have had something to do with the simultaneous release of statistics showing a slowdown in the rate of increase in unemployment. But, while welcome, this seems to have a lot to do with the severity of the recession and people's willingness to go on short time and accept pay freezes or even cuts. It is hardly, at this stage, a reliable indication of economic "recovery". There was much talk last week of the "quantitative easing", under which the Bank has been indulging in what the governor calls "an unprecedented programme of asset purchases" – amounting now to some £200bn of money being pumped into an economy whose gross domestic product is some £1,400bn. In the old days, this kind of thing was called "open market operations", although it was never on this scale – a point which once again goes to underline the seriousness of the current crisis. The textbooks tell us that when the central bank wishes to boost the stock of money it buys securities, and when it wishes to reduce the stock it sells securities. Thus, as King pointed out last week, recent and current purchases of assets by the bank "are aimed at injecting additional money directly into the economy". I am not entirely sure whether this should be called "quantitative easing" or "quantitative teasing". Traditional sceptics of monetarism have compared the process to "pushing on a string". A letter writer to the Financial Times recently joked (or did not joke) that there was plenty of money around but not much credit. The way the Bank explains the benefits is that the process works by reducing the cost of funds to companies, which have been encouraged to raise funds in the market directly, thereby easing the strains caused by the credit crunch. But, as the governor says: "I am very happy to admit that there are limits to monetary policy." And he is much exercised, as he has made plain to one and all, by the deficiencies of the banking system – to the point when some wags (and I do not mean wives and girlfriends) say that he is way to the left of a so-called Labour government. What all this boils down to is that the British economic scene remains extremely fragile and Conservative plans for a further attack on the deficit bring to mind Peter Walker's famous reference to early Thatcherism as "the economics of the madhouse".