According to the press we might as well write off 2009. Throw it in the bin and hide in a bunker until 2010 rolls into town. But perhaps that'd be a foolish move, because then we'd miss all the fantastic songs being made about this increasingly depressing recession. There has already been blog coverage about positive musical responses to times of economic hardship and, on the whole, it turned out to be a fertile period. Well, in 2009 that spirit of creativity has awoken, although this time recession-inspired songs are mainly coming from hip-hop and dancehall artists, based in the US and Jamaica. Young Jeezy's previous work was more likely to focus on partying and throwing money around rather than the state of the Dow Jones, but with his 2008 album, aptly named the Recession, he has firmly marked his cards as an unlikely socially conscious rapper. The standout track on the album is Circulate which, in one of the more fitting uses of a sample, uses Billy Paul's 1975 song Let the Dollars Circulate. The track has already been widely sampled, with Steve Spacek, J Dilla and 9th Wonder previously giving it a workout. Jeezy concentrates on his own money issues, with lines like "I'm staring at my stack like where the fuck's the rest at" and "Looking at my watch like it's a bad investment" making it clear that even successful rappers suffer in an economic downturn. It's a bit rich (no pun intended) for Jeezy to whinge about not having any money, though, when most of the time all he talks about is the fact he is flush. Still, there's no denying this is one of Jeezy's best songs so it might be worth ignoring the obvious hypocrisy. The focus on harsh economic issues can be heard in one-time Sean Kingston remixer, Beniton the Menace. Beniton's latest offering, Recession, is a call to keep the party going at all costs, even if it means shopping for the bubbly at Aldi rather than Marks &amp; Spencer's. As with Jeezy, this is perhaps Beniton's best song and he even manages to use the much maligned Auto-tune without completely ruining it. However, the video seems to have been a poorly planned afterthought and mostly involves him walking around a badly lit studio, pointing at a poster of Barack Obama, so it's best to look away – or buy the MP3. If you can afford it, obviously. Probably the most ironically upbeat recession song comes from Al Moodie with his ska-soaked tune Everything Crash, which makes impending financial meltdown sound like a right laugh. There's something slightly unnerving about the way Moodie manages to marry downtrodden lyrics like "Everybody's searching for the right solution/But everything crash, the economy crash, Lehman Brothers crash" with a summery ska backing, but it's a damn sight more tuneful than listening to Robert Peston predicting the demise of MFI on a cold winter evening. There is an imminent UK response to the recession. It comes in the form of a wonderful "credit crunch" EP from the Crazy Cousinz. I'm not sure it will get everyone smiling like their brilliant remix of Paleface and Kyla's Do You Mind did. But, then again, what have we got to dance about when we're all as skint as Jeezy?