As Barack Obama rides into Washington, joy unbounded is unleashed around the world. Once again, everyone from the centre to the left feels the tide of history turning our way. But for me, the echoes of similar welcomes for the arrivals into power of John Kennedy and Tony Blair are tinged with the memory of disappointment. This is not the same as simply expecting too much too soon of one man. Especially today, that is a legitimate concern in a complex world of interlocking factors beyond any one person's control. No, I'm referring to an almost wishful misreading of what Kennedy and Blair actually stood for. That they were intelligent, well educated and eloquent invoked a kind of uncritical idealising of the men themselves. When Kennedy started slipping women into the White House through the back door, it only added to his glamour. That he had intellectuals and poets to dinner fuelled the mythology of his Camelot. This was the same man who endorsed the misguided invasion of Cuba. He failed to sign legislation banning federal funding to firms who discriminated against black people. Lyndon Johnson – a southerner – signed it straight away. I recall Kennedy at my graduation from Harvard, on the top steps of Widener Library, legs apart, hands on hips with top hat tipped back and smoking a cigar. From behind he looked like just another pol, albeit an eloquent and intelligent one. Kennedy's death saved him from being outed. That was not the fate of Harold Wilson, who, like Kennedy won a narrow victory on the promise of change – harnessing "the white heat of technology". This was the man who let the jump jet among many inventions leave the country. The brain drain started on his watch as underpaid and undervalued scientists left for better jobs. Though he had the courage to challenge racism, the death penalty and homophobia, he is remembered for devious political manoeuvring and appointing his mistress and cronies to the Lords. When Blair won, my company took the day off to celebrate. I even became British to vote against the Tories. But his political self emerged in his first year. He exempted formula one motor racing from the ban on tobacco sponsorship after a donation from Bernie Ecclestone. He carried on his uncritical courtship of the city and private sector – signing letters for Mittal steel, promoting 24-hour drinking, super-casinos and other illiberal causes. He encouraged deregulation, PFI bonanzas that made the Thatcher years look austere. Not to mention the Iraq war. He dismissed the protest of millions before the day was over – "so Iraqis would have the right to protest too". Of course, Kennedy, Wilson and Blair did many good things. But the expectation they would live up to their own rhetoric belied the reality of political life, human weakness, vanity and the desire to be liked – as later revealed by their advisers. It is sad and unfair that they may be remembered more for our disappointment in them rather than their achievements. And that's the rub. We want politicians like Obama, Blair, Wilson and Kennedy to be our better selves – indeed better than our better selves. Reading Obama's wonderful autobiography, Dreams of My Father, I could not help but succumb to the hope that this man so painfully self-aware and self-critical might be different. He might just remember his time on the streets of Chicago and the needs of the poor people he tried to help. For him, grassroots are familiar territory, not just a phrase written for him by a smart speechwriter. But there I go, hoping again that Obama will be different. It's that old problem – pessimism of the head and optimism of the heart. But even after all the disillusionment with politics, it keeps me going.