Now we're officially entering the sequel to the Great Depression, it's inevitable that comparisons are being made with the original. Just as professional armies relish times of high unemployment because it provides them with more cannon fodder, so Hollywood dream factories may think that the harsh economic reality will drive more people to seek escape in cinemas. There are a couple of urban myths about Hollywood during the period following the Wall Street crash in 1929 that need to be exploded. These are: that the studios profited from the Depression because the American public flocked to cinemas despite their lack of money, and that the studios provided mostly escapist entertainment that hardly ever referred to the financial ruin the country was in. The truth is that, in 1930, American cinema attendance dropped by 56%. As a result of the downward trend, a number of studios were forced into receivership and many cinemas went out of business, despite lowering ticket prices, giving away prizes and adding a second feature to the programme. As for the other point, most of the films reflected the Depression either obliquely or directly, allowing audiences to share in the pessimism of the melodramas, the optimism of the musicals, the anarchism of the comedies and the nihilism of the gangster movies. Contrary to the moralistic intentions of the studios, audiences, let down by society, cheered on the gangsters, who defied the establishment and took what they wanted. The Warner Bros musicals contrasted the seedy showbusiness milieu – peopled with tough hardworking chorus girls living in cheap apartments, sugar daddies and slave-driving directors – with the illusory production numbers of the shows. Screwball comedies worked in two ways: they gave audiences a chance to vicariously watch the plutocrats at play, and also to enjoy seeing them chastised for being spoilt. For example, in Frank Capra's It Happened One Night (1934) and Gregory La Cava's My Man Godfrey (1936), the common man is presented as the exclusive bearer of common sense while members of "privileged" society are presented as feckless and out of touch with reality. "Economically, the Depression had little effect on the people in Hollywood ... Some of us scriptwriters were disgusted when we watched the producers spend more and more money on sets and things for films that completely avoided the reality of what was happening in the rest of the country at the time." And this from Donald Ogden Stewart, who wrote The Philadelphia Story, an archetypal idle-rich comedy. Plus ça change ... Most of the Hollywood films of the Depression years have uncomfortable echoes today. If the American film industry hopes to emulate the Hollywood of the 30s by mirroring today's credit crisis, they will be hard put to find stars of the calibre of Shirley Temple, Mae West, the Marx Brothers, James Cagney, Edward G Robinson, Carole Lombard, Cary Grant, Claudette Colbert and William Powell, and directors such as Frank Capra, William Wellman, Gregory La Cava and Mervyn LeRoy. If I were to curate a season of films that were made during the Depression, these would be my top 10 picks. Do you agree? And what film suggestions do you have to reflect the return of the Depression? The Public Enemy (William Wellman, 1931) This made James Cagney a star in the role of the fast-talking, tough Irish-American mobster who shoves a grapefruit in his girlfriend's face, but remains loyal to his mother. The film covertly links gangsterism to capitalism and the business ethic. Following the conventions of the era, he dies at the end – not at the hands of the police, who are deemed corrupt, but at those of rival gangsters. Gold Diggers of 1933 (Mervyn LeRoy) This did not avoid the grim reality of the times. The finale has Joan Blondell (dubbed by an unknown singer as a "street walker") singing Remember My Forgotten Man, which tells of war heroes now on the dole. A flashback reveals hundreds of men fighting in the trenches and marching. It then returns to the Depression where the same men are lining up at a soup kitchen. I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang (Mervyn LeRoy, 1932) This deals with one of the "forgotten men". First world war veteran Paul Muni returns home to find himself humiliatingly on the dole and unsuccessfully attempting to pawn his war medals before being unjustly imprisoned. One of the most uncompromising of social protest films, it depicted the brutality of penal institutions in the American south. The chilling ending has Muni, when asked how he survives, whispering: "I steal." Despite its pessimism, it resounded with audiences and became a box-office success. American Madness (Frank Capra, 1932) This featured Walter Huston as the embodiment of a populist bank president whose faith in the common man puts him at odds with fat-cat bankers eager to push through a lucrative merger. Playing on Depression anxieties, it shows how quickly a crowd of ordinary citizens can turn into a lynch mob if provoked. Capra still clung to the myth that heroic individual action by "little men" could come to the rescue of the economy. Wild Boys of the Road (William Wellman, 1933) A deeply felt, hard-hitting story of young people who travel around the country, hopping trains and trying to survive. It deals vividly with one of the major social problems of the Depression era: unemployed youth. Man's Castle (Frank Borzage, 1933) This film about a young couple (Spencer Tracy, Loretta Young) living in the New York shantytown dubbed Hooverville, looking for a ray of hope, had a rare urban poetry. The scene when he presents her with a new cooker has a touching romanticism – more than if he had given her diamonds. Our Daily Bread (King Vidor, 1934) This was called "pinko" by the Hearst press and "capitalist propaganda" by the Soviet press. A young couple inherit a derelict farm and decide to start an agricultural co-operative for the many dispossessed craftsmen hit by the Depression. Gabriel Over the White House (Gregory La Cava, 1933) This has a familiar ring to it. Walter Huston as a newly elected president, after a car accident, solves all of the nation's (and then the world's) problems. He helps get the country out of Depression by putting the jobless back to work through construction projects, and even brings about world peace by forcing universal disarmament. Duck Soup (Leo McCarey, 1933) The outrageous Marx Brothers comedy begins with a political crisis in which there is talk of a financial bailout, and ends with a war – very appropriate for the time of immense social upheaval. The film was a critical and commercial failure when it was first released, because audiences were looking for reassurance, not cynicism, however hilarious. Kuhle Wampe (Slatan Dudow, 1932) Kuhle Wampe is the name of a tent city located outside Berlin where a family has taken refuge after losing their home. This was the only film Bertolt Brecht (who wrote the screenplay), was involved in that didn't distort his intensions. A passionate, powerful and poetic propaganda piece, it included ballads in the manner of Brecht's plays. The film fell foul of the censors, who felt it "endangered the safety of the state", not realising that the true danger was approaching with the emergence of the Nazi party. This is the only non-American film on the list, mainly because Germany, Italy and Japan were "rescued" from Depression by fascism, Russia by communism and France, temporarily, by the Popular Front.