Cheltenham borough council is currently suing its former managing director for just under £1m, claiming that she lied on her job application. According to the council, Christine Laird replied "No" to the question "Do you see yourself as disabled?" when completing a pre-employment questionnaire. Asked whether she enjoyed good health, she is said to have answered, "Yes". The council argues that Laird is guilty of "fraudulent or negligent misrepresentation" and "deceit" because she failed to disclose that she had in fact suffered three bouts of depression since 1997, for which she had taken time off work. She had also been taking antidepressants for a number of years, it was claimed. Laird, who was given the job in February 2002 was absent on full pay from June 2004 until she left in 2005. Laird denies the allegations and the High Court hearing is expected to last seven weeks. Clearly, this is a complicated case to unravel. Whatever went on in Cheltenham borough council, with allegations and counter-allegations flying between Laird and the Lib Dem leader of the council, Andrew McKinlay, it seems to have become exceedingly unpleasant. But while I don't know enough to comment further on this particular situation, I confess that as a general principle, anyone who lies to disguise a mental health history on a job application has my heartfelt sympathy. According to research by the government's social exclusion unit, fewer than 40% of employers would even consider employing someone with a history of mental health problems and three quarters of employers state that it would be difficult or impossible to employ a person with a diagnosis of schizophrenia. Just 24% of people with long term mental health problems are in employment and one third of people with mental health problems report having been dismissed or forced to resign from their job. If you're looking for a job, with a mental health history, it's easy to see how lying might seem the only viable option. One of the chief delights of being self-employed is that I no longer have to answer those wretched health questions on job application forms. In the past, when I did, I always lied because I believed that unless I did so I wouldn't even be considered. I didn't lie because I wanted to trick my way into a job I wasn't capable of doing. I lied because I knew that I was capable but that my mental health history would likely prevent potential employers from recognising the fact. It's not an ideal solution by any means. Starting a new job is stressful enough without the added pressure of having to do so under false pretences – the constant fear of revelation, being dismissed or even taken to court and sued for damages. I believe that the system itself is at fault. In the US employers are not permitted to ask about an individual's health history until after an offer of employment has been made. This strikes me as a very much more sensible way of going about things. If there is a genuine reason why a particular health problem would render someone unfit for the job then this must be stated openly and can, in consequence, be challenged. The fact is that usually the only reasons are stigma and ignorance and you can't challenge either unless you can get through the door. • Clare Allan writes a monthly SocietyGuardian column about mental health issues