Growing numbers of pupils have mental health issues because of the stress of exams, family breakdown and pressures to look good and schools need more trained counsellors to cope, teachers have said. A survey of 700 school staff by the Association of Teachers and Lecturers published today found that they are spending increasing amounts of their working weeks caring for pupils struggling with emotional issues. Some 70% said they helped pupils with emotional or mental health problems at least once a week, and over a quarter spend time supporting pupils daily. The research comes after the head of the union launched a devastating attack on parents, accusing many of failing in their responsibilities and undermining schools. Writing in last week's Observer, Mary Bousted said that children were arriving at school ill-prepared by their parents, with a lack of respect for authority and lacking basic social and verbal skills. More than half of teachers feel that pupils are under more pressure now than two years ago and over 70% say pupils face more pressure than a decade ago. Teachers blamed exam pressure, the overcrowded curriculum and lack of parental support, all of which can leave pupils withdrawn, aggressive, unable to concentrate and with low self-esteem. There are also signs of pupils struggling with family breakdown and social pressures to be thin, or look good. Keith Claridge, a member of support staff at George Eliot community school in Warwickshire, said: "The pressures and stress on young people today are immense and children are expected to behave as adults. Sometimes the pressure put on them is more than adults could cope with." Of those surveyed, 80% said testing and exams were the greatest cause of pupil stress. Family break-up was cited by 76% of staff for pupils' stress and more than half said children face intense pressures to do well academically and to achieve the "perfect" body. Most staff said they had witnessed pupils crying but 43% said pupils had self-harmed because of the pressures they are under and 37% said pupils suffered from eating disorders. The survey found the support that schools offer to pupils varied considerably – 10% of schools had no policy or strategy to identify and help pupils with problems. While 73% of staff said that their school had a counsellor to support pupils, some were concerned that they were overstretched and there were far more pupils with issues than counsellors able to help them, leaving teachers responsible. Delegates at the ATL conference in Liverpool voted to campaign for more trained counsellors in schools to treat children. Maureen Meatcher, an ATL member from Berkshire, said: "We must make sure counsellors employed know what they're doing and are able to work with staff effectively to help all children achieve their best potential." School staff also felt that there was too much bureaucracy to deal with when referring pupils to external agencies for help and services were not sufficiently joined-up. Bousted said: "Unfortunately, there is a greater need for trained counsellors to handle the depth and severity of pupils' emotional, mental health and behavioural problems in schools today. Pupils cannot be held in a queue when their wellbeing is at risk, and teachers, support staff and school leaders should not have to shoulder the full responsibility for supporting their needs. A government-backed review of mental health services for children, published last November, criticised the lack of consistency in services for young people and urged ministers to invest in training for all people who work with children.