Tearaway teenagers identified by teachers as misbehaving at school are more likely to go on to experience difficulties in their adult lives, including depression and divorce, a major study has found. Researchers looked at the health and social problems of more than 3,500 adults whose behaviour had been rated by their teachers when they were aged 13 and 15. Between the ages of 36 and 53 they were asked again about their mental health and social and economic status. The 40-year study showed that participants with severe or mild behaviour problems in adolescence were more likely to leave school with no qualifications and go on to suffer a number of difficulties throughout their adulthood, including depression, anxiety, divorce and financial concerns. This result held true even after taking into account predictors of outcomes in adulthood such as sex, father's social class, adolescent depression and cognitive ability. Published in the British Medical Journal today, the study was led by Prof Ian Colman, now at the University of Alberta in Canada, and used data from the Medical Research Council's national survey of health and development. Colman said: "Given the long-term costs to society, and the distressing impact on the adolescents themselves, our results might have considerable implications for public health policy." Behavioural problems in schools affect about 7% of 9- to 15-year-olds and have been increasing for the past 30 years. Previous studies have shown that individuals with severe conduct problems place a significant burden on society in terms of crime, as well as through additional needs in education, health and welfare. But, unlike previous studies in the field, the new study's findings also showed that most of the participants who were badly behaved at school did not have alcohol problems as they got older. Christine Blower, acting general secretary of the National Union of Teachers, said: "It is a often a matter of continuing frustration to teachers that they can't spend sufficient time working with pupils with poor behaviour. "Teachers want to follow through with colleagues, often on problems which arise from pupils' dysfunctional home lives, as a priority but time pressures often get in the way. Teachers need that time. "Schools would also be greatly helped if they had dedicated funding for sufficient trained counsellors. They would be greatly supported if the unrelated and distracting pressures of tests targets and tables were alleviated." Prof Diana Kuh, director of the MRC's National Survey of Health and Development, which has tracked people from birth in 1946 until today, said: "It's not all doom and gloom. "It's true that those groups do have more difficulties than the more well behaved group throughout life but that doesn't mean for a minute that anyone who misbehaved at school will end up having a difficult life - just that the probability is higher. "None of this is deterministic. Some people will carry on having problems, some will not, which is why early intervention is important but also help for people throughout life." Dr Mary Bousted, general secretary of the Association of Teachers and Lecturers, said: "This report is a boost to the already significant work carried out in schools and local authorities to support these young people and an important reminder of the vital place of multi-agency working and early diagnosis of problems, both in terms of that individual's life chances and the impact, social and economic, on the broader society."