Group therapy sessions are to be introduced to classrooms to help adolescents avoid succumbing to depression. More than 7,000 teenagers, aged between 13 and 16, will take part in the £1m government-funded trial. Based on research carried out in Australia, the pioneering scheme is particularly aimed at reducing the number of teenagers, currently estimated at 20%, who are classed as high risk. It will be introduced initially into schools in Bath, Bristol, Nottingham and Swindon. The three-year study aims to identify the best method for schools to tackle teenage mental health issues. If successful it is hoped the programme can be extended throughout the UK. Professor Paul Stallard, a consultant psychologist at Bath University who is leading the study, said: "Everybody knows that depression in young people is not uncommon. We also know it can start during adolescence. The idea here is to see if we can prevent young people from developing low moods and keep them emotionally healthy and well." The programme is based on cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) and aims to make it part of the school curriculum. Pupils in each school will be divided into three groups. In one pupils will be encouraged to become involved in discussions prompted by watching videos on issues such as keeping calm, problem solving, managing unpleasant emotions and looking at things from other people's perspectives. They will be thoroughly assessed to pick out any signs of depression both before and at the end of the 18-week series of sessions, which will form part of their personal health and social education lessons. They will log their responses and there will be follow-up assessments. Their results will be compared against classes receiving normal PHSE lessons as well as those who will have "placebo" or dummy lessons. The scheme is based on the Resourceful Adolescent Programme, first run in Australia 10 years ago to increase pupils' mental resilience. Stallard said the programme was aimed at getting children to understand their personal strengths. "People get depressed, they get overwhelmed, then they feel helpless and think they can't do anything. Hopefully this will help identify the best way to help them with ways to think about problems. "We are hoping at the end of this trial to be much clearer about the sort of things we can do within mainstream schools to make children happier, to improve their mood and hopefully prevent some of those children from becoming depressed. There is nothing like this in this country at the moment. "If we can find the key, it will be a significant step forward. The whole idea of doing this in schools is that once we can find out the benefits of these programmes and what works it could be taken up by schools up and down the country. That would be the ultimate aim." National guidelines recommend CBT for mild to moderate depression and anxiety and it has shown promising effects in children who are depressed or at risk from depression, Stallard said.