Hostage expert Dr James Thompson on how Peter Moore will have survived his captivity and how he is likely to fare after his release "People always regret making certain choices in their lives. If they walk down the street to go to the shops and are hit by a meteor, that's a random event. But when other things happen, people wonder what they have done that has led to this terrible thing happening to them. Regrets when bad things happen are often very damaging to the person, quite apart from the events themselves. Was there a family member who maybe said 'Don't go, I don't like the sound of Iraq' and did he perhaps say 'Don't worry, I will have bodyguards'? The key issue, depending on how Peter Moore was treated, is his depletion of resources. If you have a psychological reverse in your career or personal life, like an argument after which you have an emotional reaction, you will probably be down for a few days and, once you have thought about it, you will recover. But being a hostage involves a constant threat. This poor man has had two and a half years of not knowing whether the next knock on the door was him being moved to a new hiding place or to a place of execution. That's a very high demand on one's emotional capacities. Most of us can withstand a short period of threat, but very few people can withstand it for more than days or weeks. In a situation of constant stress, with your coping resources depleted, you are running on empty and there's little you can do to keep functioning properly. If he was held with others he would have had company and distractions. Being alone would have been worse because anyone, to sustain a reasonably normal psychological life, needs human contact, to be recognised as a person, and a variety of sensory inputs, like knowing when it's night and day. Being held alone would have been like being in solitary confinement on death row. In a sense getting out is the start of the difficulty. Despite the lifting of the threat to your life, the person can face all sorts of mental hardship. Very few former hostages are immediately well, mentally speaking. It doesn't mean that they go psychotic or can't understand reality, but they tend to have significant adjustment problems. Typically they are much more fearful than before, one of the symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder, which he will have. When the Kuwait Airways hijack ended in 1988, some of the people who had been on the plane for the 16 days it lasted had real difficulty in understanding that they had been freed. And a study of oil workers who spent time in the North Sea in 1980 when the Alexander Kielland platform collapsed – killing 123 men – showed that, 10 years later, they were still getting problems. Peter Moore will probably initially look normal, because he will be overjoyed to have got out. He will probably say that he's fine and relieved that it's all over. If he's asked if he's going to go for counselling, he may well say no. But there's a very high probability that in three months he will be seeking help because he has difficulty sleeping or is finding it hard to deal with other people, or is irritable all the time. That's because he's lost the capacity to deal with normal exchanges. Full recovery can take two or three years and there can be setbacks along the way." Dr James Thompson is a senior lecturer in psychology at University College London and an expert in post-traumatic stress disorder in former hostages. Interview by Denis Campbell