Last week's suicide of the German goalkeeper Robert Enke revealed more than the terrible news of one man's death, the cruelty of depression and the pressures on sportsmen to protect the public's idealised view of them; it also exposed the ongoing shame and stigma of mental illness. For years he had been struggling with depression, kept secret from the public and his colleagues for fear of a vicious backlash that could, he apparently feared, raise questions about his capacity to care for his adopted baby girl and play for his nation. Rather than risk this, and perhaps further despairing under the force of these private terrors, he chose the solution of death. That this seemed preferable to risking public awareness of his depression and the imagined consequences of personal shame, family destruction and exclusion from his nation's crucial sporting event, demonstrates something of the huge level of hatred that mental illness still evokes in the public imagination. The stigma only worsens the burden on those with mental health problems, typically reported as one in four of the adult population in the UK. When people die by their own hand, a response of shocked disbelief, of the sense of an awful secret that has been starkly exposed, occurs all too often. How is it in this advanced age of emotional literacy, psychological self-help and media shrinks that the shame of depression and other mental illness causes people to desperately try to hide their problems rather than challenge society to accept that they, like so many others, are vulnerable? In my experience as a mental health professional I have suffered the loss of two highly regarded male colleagues, by suicide, whose depression had never been spoken about or known by those best placed to help them – their workmates and friends. Their terror of public exposure drove them to the point of deception and absolute isolation. Only after their deaths were their colleagues able to understand. One could argue that this reflects only individual psychic defences, that those who work as healers of mental illness project their own disturbance into others as a way of disowning it in themselves, but I believe that the forces that drive these people are not just internal fears about facing the depression within themselves, but reflected realistic assessments of the professional and personal damage that disclosing mental health difficulties can cause in a society that still only pays lip service to real tolerance of difference. While soul-searching can not bring back the lost lives of Enke or my two talented and troubled colleagues, an enlightened view on the commonplace nature of depression, the ordinary treatments of psychological therapies and psychotropic medication that can help it so profoundly, and a degree of restraint in our own temptation to vilify those whom we admire but who show some vulnerability, could go some way to helping prevent other young suicides. The courage of celebrities like Paul Merton and Stephen Fry, who make public their struggles with depression, should be celebrated as valuable antidotes to the destructive power of stigma.