Four in five mothers suffer some sort of "baby blues" in the first months after giving birth, but 10% develop a full-blown depression. If this hits, it has massive implications for the whole family, as well as you. Assuming you have a choice, which therapy should you opt for? The main alternatives are antidepressants, cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and psychodynamic psychotherapy. The pills rule out breastfeeding, and in the great majority of cases, even if they do have an effect it is a placebo – people given chalk pills but told they are antidepressants are almost as likely to claim to feel better as people given the real thing. Regarding the talking therapies, in one study depressed new mothers were randomly assigned to eight sessions of CBT, or to counselling, or to psychodynamic psychotherapy. Eighteen weeks later, the ones given dynamic therapy were most likely to have recovered (71%, versus 57% for CBT, 54% counselling). For many years, psychoanalysis was written off as unscientific because it was untestable as a theory, but studies done in the last 15 years have largely confirmed Freud's basic theories. Dreams have been proven to contain meaning. Early childhood experience has been shown to be a major determinant of adult character. And it is now accepted by almost all psychologists that we do have an unconscious and that it can contain material that has been repressed because it is unacceptable to the conscious mind. The treatment Freud's theory gave rise to entailed patients attending 50-minute sessions for up to five times a week, lying on a couch and speaking whatever entered their mind. Childhood relations with parents were used to interpret dreams and their relationship to the analyst. Although slow to be tested, the clinical technique has now also been demonstrated to work. The strongest evidence for its superiority over cognitive, short-term treatments was published last year. Initially, eight to 20 sessions of short-term therapy reduced depression and anxiety, more so than going two to three times a week for psychoanalytic therapy. However, after three years, those receiving the long-term psychoanalytic treatment were dramatically better off: less likely to be depressed and four times more likely to have recovered from anxiety. A recent survey of 23 other studies had similar findings. Many studies show that the sort of person a therapist is – especially whether they are warm – is more important than their orientation. There are undoubtedly some very good CBT therapists (despite, rather than because of, their training) and some appallingly bad psychoanalysts (some of whom I have had the misfortune to visit myself). But a "campaign for real therapy" would insist on systematic scrutiny of how parental care in the early years affected you and close attention to the relationship between therapist and client. Since hardcore CBT rejects both these, it will never be of enduring value. If it's all that's on offer, hold out for one who is warm and prepared to deviate from strict CBT manuals – willing to provide more than a handful of sessions and to talk about childhood causes of problems. I realise this is a tall order if you are depressed with a newborn. That makes it vital that partners take a big interest in what kind of care is being offered and don't just go along with the tendency of GPs to dole out pills or CBT. Postnatal depression therapy study: Cooper, PJ et al, 2003, British Journal of Psychiatry, 182, 412-9. Strongest evidence for Psychoanalysis: Knekt, P et al, 2008, Psychological Medicine, vol 38, 689-703. Review of 23 long-term therapies: Leichsenring, DSc et al, 2008, JAMA, 300, 13, 1551-65. More Oliver James at selfishcapitalist.com