Few reality TV contestants can be unaware of the pressures of celebrity after witnessing the overnight fame of Susan Boyle, the singer who became a global star when she won over an initially hostile audience on Britain's Got Talent. An overhaul of the treatment of those taking part in this year's series of The X Factor, prompted in part by Boyle's collapse and admission to a private clinic, will see contestants in the later stages undergoing thorough psychological appraisals to judge their fitness to compete. Production company TalkbackThames, which makes both ITV reality series, has introduced new guidelines for The X Factor, the new series of which begins on Saturday, in an attempt to give contestants extra support. These will include psychologists being on set throughout the show's run – previously they were only on call – and special care being given to one contestant who has Asperger's syndrome. For the first time, full psychological appraisals will be undertaken on the final 24 contestants. The changes follow the last-minute decision of the series creator, Simon Cowell, to make contestants audition in front of an audience of 3,000 at arenas across the country – a far more pressurised environment than the previous format of auditioning in front of the show's four judges. Producers were criticised after Boyle's collapse when it emerged that she had not been psychologically tested before taking part in Britain's Got Talent. She suffered oxygen deprivation during birth, resulting in learning disabilities. Self-esteem Professor Chris Thompson, the chief medical officer at the Priory, where Boyle was admitted, voiced concern at the time about the level of care provided for reality show contestants, warning that sudden fame could destroy a person's self-esteem if they were not given adequate support and that exposing someone to huge public attention could be "terribly risky". Richard Holloway, the executive producer of The X Factor and Britain's Got Talent, said lessons had been learned from Boyle. "We have always had doctors and psychologists and psychiatrists on call if people needed professional help, but what we have done this year, because the show keeps getting bigger and there is more focus on it, is we have looked at our policies quite carefully and decided that we should have people with us all the way through, particularly with the pressure of audiences at the auditions," he said. Holloway said that the growth in internet videosharing and social networking websites had driven interest in reality shows and its contestants, hugely increasing the pressure on them. "What we learned from the Susan Boyle situation was that she had very little pressure from the show, as she only performed three times, but that the pressure came from the huge interest in her," he said. "It was dealing with all of that which made it something we had to focus on. Once that huge amount of interest was there, it was so overpowering. For us, it is not just a question of care, it is a question of protection." Holloway said there had been no incidents requiring the psychologist to step in during this year's X Factor auditions, which have already been filmed, although producers had taken on board advice about a 21-year-old contestant, Scott James, who has Asperger's syndrome. James, who told judges he did not leave his house for seven years because of his condition, discovered singing five years ago. His parents sent him to a music teacher, who encouraged him to audition for The X Factor. He is expected to make it through to later rounds. "We were aware of his condition," said Holloway. "He absolutely loved the audition. After he had finished, the psychologist spoke to him and asked him how it was and she said it had been a really positive experience for him. I asked if there was anything we should be aware of and she said that her only advice at that stage was that we needed to treat him carefully." However, in comments published in this week's Radio Times, one of the show's judges, Louis Walsh, said he did not believe some contestants such as James would be able to take the strain of appearing. "I don't think they can, if I'm honest," he said. "People don't realise the pressure that these acts are under, especially when they're competing with everybody else backstage. It's a very difficult show to do, even as a judge. "It's very gruelling, and it's 10 weeks of very intense performance. Everything you say and do is being watched. It's a massive reality check for some people." But he denied it was unfair to let James appear. "Nobody forces anybody to go to an audition," Walsh said. "Is he under too much pressure? I think it has to be his choice." Walsh said the new audition format was tough on contestants and judges. "When we walk out, there are 2,000 people behind us," he said. "It's difficult for me, but it's definitely raised the bar of the show." Other changes to this year's series will see the Saturday results show move to a Sunday to spread the ratings the format brings across the weekend. The new live Sunday show will feature more ensemble pieces from the contestants as well as performances from big-name stars such as Robbie Williams. The move comes after the show's main rival, BBC1's Strictly Come Dancing, confirmed it would be shifting its results show back to Saturday from its current Sunday berth. Casualties of fame Susan Boyle Admitted to a clinic for exhaustion in May after failing to cope with the sudden fame that came from her appearance on Britain's Got Talent. After spending five days at the Priory, she was released and is now embarking on recording her first album, which is expected to be released in the US first. Hollie Steel The 10-year-old singer broke down in tears during a live Britain's Got Talent semi-final in May and begged producers to let her start again. Simon Cowell allowed her another chance, but she did not make it through to the final. The government has announced a review into whether children on TV talent shows need better protection. Sree Dasari The former Big Brother contestant was rushed to hospital last month after cutting his wrists while watching the show alone in his university hall of residence after being evicted. The foreign student was deemed well enough to appear on that night's edition of the spin-off show Big Brother's Big Mouth.