Caroline Horton opens her new show with an apology. Several apologies, in fact. You’re not supposed to start a performance by saying sorry, she acknowledges, it tends to make audience members uncomfortable. But then again, All of Me is not all that interested in setting spectators at ease. Nothing about depression – the subject of Horton’s show – is comfortable or crowd-pleasing. All of Me used to be one kind of show about depression, Horton explains: a lighter, more hopeful kind of show – a bit like Mess, Horton’s playful piece about her experience of anorexia. But during the making of this show, Horton became ill again. So now All of Me is unashamedly bleak, resisting the redemptive narrative arc that is so often expected from plays about mental health. Confronting the darkness that can make death seem welcoming, Horton takes us on a journey to the underworld. Her depression is interwoven with myth, switching abruptly from ancient narrative to everyday hopelessness. One moment, Horton is approaching the guardians of the underworld; the next, she’s lying on the floor in unwashed clothes, unable to get up. Through layers of storytelling, song and looped sound we hear the overwhelming noise of despair – as well as its occasional absurdity. It’s messy. It could hardly be otherwise. And, perhaps more surprisingly, it’s beautiful. The underworld as evoked by Horton is as seductive as it is haunting. The dim lighting bounces off a pair of glitterballs, sending fragments of brightness into the gloom. Horton, a deathly figure in a towering headdress, sings a melancholy tune that lingers in the ear. So much about depression is ugly or simply blank, but Horton is able to find a strange sort of magnificence in the darkness. There’s also a fierce political edge to All of Me. Through its non-linear structure, it pushes back against society’s desire for quick fixes. The show, with its loops and echoes, recognises mental health as something that ebbs and flows – as well as something that responds to the society we live in. If we want to hear fewer stories about mental illness, Horton suggests, we need to “unfuck the world”. • At Summerhall, Edinburgh, until 25 August. Then at the Yard, London, 10-28 September. • Read all our Edinburgh festival reviews