Justin Bieber has shared an emotional essay about how childhood stardom led him to make a string of bad decisions and become “the most hated person in the world”, resulting in thoughts of killing himself. “Sometimes it can get to the point where you don’t even want to live any more,” he wrote in a long note posted on Instagram. “I went from a 13-year-old boy in a small town to being praised left and right by the world, with millions saying how they loved me and how great I was … You hear these things enough as a young boy and you actually start believing [them].” The musician, who was discovered aged 13 by manager Scooter Braun, wrote: “Everyone did everything for me so I never even learned the fundamentals of responsibility.” In 2013, when he was 19, Bieber attempted to take his pet monkey to Germany. The animal was seized at customs in Munich and placed in quarantine. Bieber did not retrieve the monkey, which was transferred to a local zoo. Later that year, his neighbours in Calabasas, California, accused him of speeding through the streets in his Ferrari, which he denied. He served probation in a criminal plea deal after egging a neighbour’s house. He was also filmed urinating in a restaurant mop bucket while shouting: “Fuck Bill Clinton.” Bieber is said to have apologised privately to Clinton. In his Instagram post, Bieber admitted to “doing pretty heavy drugs at 19 and [abusing] all of my relationships”. Bieber wrote that he “became resentful, disrespectful to women, and angry. I became distant to everyone who loved me and I was hiding behind a shell of a person that I had become.” Now 25, Bieber credited the support of friends, his Christian faith and his marriage with helping to turn his life around. He married model Hailey Baldwin in 2018. Marriage, he said, has taught him “patience, trust, commitment, kindness, humility and all of the things it looks like to be a good man”. In 2017, Bieber took a break from the music industry, cancelling the final 14 dates of a world tour, saying: “I want my mind, heart and soul to be sustainable.” He recently sang on Ed Sheeran’s single I Don’t Care and a remix of Bad Guy by Billie Eilish. • In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 and Papyrus can be contacted on 0800 068 4141. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found at befrienders.org.