Civil servants are in the pre-election period that used to be called “purdah”, before anyone realised we shouldn’t use that word. I’m afraid I’d just assumed it was an election campaign portmanteau cooked up by Dominic Cummings to unsettle northern Labour voters by giving the words “purgatory” and “murder” a Cockney mashup. It has more than unsettled us. PFFP – or the period formerly famous as purdah – normally means knackered civil servants like me have a chance to put our trotters up for a bit. That’s because, until the result comes in, Cabinet Office rules mean we aren’t allowed to get stuck into any major new policy or spending decisions. Trouble is, this election is proving to be far from normal – its wintry setting doesn’t even make the top five most Game of Thrones things about it. Facing almost wartime levels of uncertainty – as the Institute for Government explains – is putting the civil service under incredible strain, and we need to get ready for some potentially huge U-turns in government policy. Meanwhile, although Operation Yellowhammer has officially been stood down, thousands of us – me included – are still working on preparations for a no-deal outcome after 31 January. For civil servants, says the IfG’s director of research, Emma Norris, “all bets are off”. All in all, it’s been a bruising few months for us. Hell, it’s been a hellish three years. I used to worry that the contradictory demands of Brexit might kill off the civil service. Then, when the full horrific impact of any sort of Brexit first became known, I started hoping that Brexit would kill us off. Better that than actively facilitating – and then being blamed for – the most significant act of national self-harm in living memory. Thankfully, that was just a momentary wobble. What worries me now is that Brexit might not kill us. That it will never “just get it done”. That we will all simply keep going, endlessly orbiting around this Brexit black hole in a perpetual, exhausting state of onanistic, no-deal groundhoggery. The idea that all this could be celebrated one day by our amphibious descendants at a festival of Brexit – a sort of cognitive dissonance Olympics – is too horrible to bear. I admit it – I’m depressed. So many of us are. Earlier this year, the Liberal Democrat MP Tom Brake flagged the rising multimillion-pound cost of mental illness in the civil service as partly due to the impact of Brexit “both in terms of direct attacks on civil servants … and diverting staff from other policy work”. In some ways, we’re incredibly lucky – many government departments now offer a range of mental health support services. This year, there have been awareness campaigns, posters on the walls reminding us exactly how OK it is not to be OK, and endless emails from HR and senior civil servants telling us to look after our mental health. And last month we saw the launch of the government-wide annual People Survey, which for the first time has asked all 400,000 of us questions about our mental wellbeing – our bosses anxiously and unironically await the full results in mid-January. If I sound less than grateful for all this, it’s because these efforts aren’t working. Like the rest of the UK, we feel utterly powerless about Brexit. I wrote about no-deal risk management meetings where no one dares name the real risks to the country’s sanity. I’m no psychologist, but I’m convinced the cause of all this stress on us – and on you – isn’t actually Brexit. It’s a spectacular and persistent failure of government and politicians simply to tell the truth about Brexit. The defenestrated senior Tory David Gauke spoke last week of the “failure to level with the British people … the idea that we’re just going to kind of get Brexit done on 31 January and then we can move on to other things … simply doesn’t reflect the reality”. He hit the nail on the head. This pernicious and systematic contempt for the truth must be tackled by the incoming cohort of parliamentarians if we’re to have any chance of avoiding a Trumpian descent into a paralysing, partisan madness that’ll poison politics for a generation. But civil servants are not blameless either. We aren’t just victims of political gaslighting, we’re also unwilling accomplices in a range of crimes against the country’s mental health. What do they say? Hurt people hurt people. Take those in the Department for Work and Pensions, who are amassing their own miserable scrapbook of stories about how its systems are driving up poverty and demoralising the people they are supposed to be helping – and then telling claimants to hide the subsequent effects on their mental health. There’s also the DWP’s campaign that last month was censured by the Advertising Standards Authority for brazenly misleading the public about the effects of universal credit. I don’t say this to blame or shame my DWP colleagues. Given the kind of policies they have to enforce, it’s actually strangely reassuring that the DWP sits at the top of the government rankings for total numbers of stress-related absence. In the end, we are all human beings. The reality is that civil servants ache to talk about reality, about how things really are. We instinctively know that the freedom to do that lies at the heart of both good government and good mental health. But the #brilliantcivilservice that our boss, Sir Mark Sedwill, tweets about can only thrive in an enabling political environment that cherishes facts, evidence, truth. Yes, let’s keep talking about mental health. But if we can’t even properly admit to ourselves the hard facts about the decline of the UK’s international influence, the fact that any kind of Brexit will smother us for decades, or that the UK has very likely changed its mind about whether it wants Brexit at all – then we’ll never be resilient enough to properly tackle the other big issues of the day, much less solve them. Suspend logic and sanity for Brexit and expect it to somehow snap back into place for everything else? Now that is madness. • The civil servant works in a Whitehall department