You rightly bring to your readers’ attention the suffering of students with mental health problems (Report, 16 September). It is outrageous that students have to wait between two and three months for help – and tragically, in some cases, it is too late. I am 78, and up until recently I was a specialist mentor, working with university students. During that time, I came across an alarmingly high number of young people who were self-harming and often contemplated suicide. Initially, students were able to receive instantaneous help, as our counsellors had a walk-in policy and I was always available to see my mentees in a pod within the university library. Our main focus was to enable these young men and women, facing suicidal thoughts, to develop coping strategies and above all to learn to respect themselves. Unfortunately, as universities were facing cuts, many disability offices were forced to contract and many were outsourced. Effectively, students had no one-to-one help and faced long waiting times. I and others found it impossible to continue. It is very important to emphasise the importance of prevention, which to a large extent depends upon having empathy and listening skills. It is not too late to reverse this sad situation. Bearing in mind that young students may regard counselling a stigma, I would suggest that universities and local authorities make free mentoring available for all vulnerable people. Constantine Louis London • Norman Lamb is rightly concerned about student mental health, but his current thinking seems to put the most emphasis on action after the event, with greater monitoring and resources for those seeking help. A better approach would be to find concrete ways to help prevent students becoming depressed and anxious in the first place, which means supporting their adjustment to this new away-from-home life. I would therefore advocate the end of freshers’ week, or at least the staging of it at the very beginning of the first year. This unstructured period often means shy students away from home are left isolated and can struggle to make new contacts, as well as cope with the horrendous emphasis on drink. It is the opposite of caring. Instead, the first few days should be timetabled in great detail so that new students are introduced to others on the same courses, immediately providing them with colleagues to socialise with and classes to attend. Once they have found their feet, they are more likely to feel confident in their new environment and will be ready to explore wider. Jackie Sherman Christchurch, Dorset • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org