Remembering the good times may help adolescents stave off depression, according to research on teenagers who were at risk of mental illness because of childhood hardships. Scientists at the University of Cambridge found recalling happy events appeared to build their resilience to mental illness, suggesting this could assist in preventing depression later in life. “Really focusing on positive things that happened to you on a specific day may be helpful,” said Dr Anne-Laura van Harmelen, the director of the risk and resilience group at the university. “It’s important to remember that resilience isn’t something you have or don’t have. It is something you can build, learn and improve.” Up to half of western children have experienced events that were traumatic or stressful enough to raise their risk of depression, research has shown. Abuse, bullying and neglect, poverty, sick or warring parents and the death of someone close could all leave children more vulnerable to depression that emerged earlier, was more severe and was harder to treat than usual. It has been clear from the ages illnesses arise that childhood is a crucial time for mental health. About half of mental disorders become evident by the age of 14, a figure that increases to 75% by the age of 18. According to the World Health Organization, adverse events in childhood have accounted for nearly one-third of all mental health problems. Adrian Askelund at Cambridge, working with Van Harmelen, reanalysed mental health data gathered in the 1990s from 427 young people with an average age of 14. All were considered to be at risk of depression because of their emotional temperaments and life histories. The scientists looked at participants’ responses to questions about recent life events, feelings of depression and any negative thoughts, such as believing they were useless. They also looked at the teenagers’ replies when asked to recall specific memories prompted by a given word, such as “happy”. All gave morning saliva samples that were tested for levels of the stress hormone cortisol. Negative thoughts about oneself and high morning cortisol were both linked to a higher risk of depression. The interviews and saliva tests were repeated a year later. The researchers found those who recalled the highest proportion of specific happy times had fewer negative thoughts, and lower morning cortisol levels. The act of remembering the good times seemed to build resilience to depression, though only when there were precise events on a particular day. Previous work has found evidence that healthy people reminisced about the good times to cheer themselves up. The latest study, in the Nature journal, suggested it helped reduce the stress of hard times, and boosted people’s self-image, both of which then improved resilience to depression. A recent review from Van Hermelen and others found 20 “resilience factors” that could be improved to protect children from depression. Some were linked to personality, with low self-esteem and a tendency to ruminate both making children more vulnerable, while an engaged, harmonious and encouraging family reduced the risk of depression. She said: “We know that the types of mental illnesses that are related to childhood adversity are more severe, more likely to recur, and are less responsive to treatment. It is critical that we identify things that can help to prevent mental illness emerging in these adolescents, so we can protect them.” Marc Bush, the director of policy at YoungMinds, a child and adolescent mental health charity, said: “We know that the circumstances that children grow up in have a big impact on their mental health, and those who have had difficult experiences in childhood, such as growing up in poverty, or being abused or neglected, are the most likely to develop mental health problems. “As this study shows, creating happy memories can build self-esteem and be a great help to draw on during tougher times, which is why it’s so important to build children’s resilience from a young age. “But it’s also crucial that as a society we get much better at identifying behaviour that may be a reaction to a traumatic event or a sign of emotional distress, and equip frontline professionals to know what to do to support them.” In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or emailjo@samaritans.org. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.