Florian Zeller’s remarkable play completes a trilogy that views a single family from different perspectives. In The Father, the focus was on aged dementia and in The Mother on middle-aged angst. Now Zeller turns his attention to adolescent depression and the result, while displaying his usual technical skill, reminds us that his greatest gift is for generating emotion. I’d defy anyone not to be moved by this study of the disruptive dynamics of family life. We sense something is amiss from the first moment when we see Laurie Kynaston as the teenage Nicolas alone in a room obsessively scribbling on a wall. His mother, Anne, then turns up at the home her ex-husband, Pierre, shares with his new lover, Sofia, and their baby son. Anne explains that Nicolas is unwell, has played truant from school for three months and that she can no longer cope. The solution – for the boy to live with his father – only makes matters worse. Nicolas lies, engages in self-mutilation, turns suicidal and even when he gets psychiatric help, it offers no answer. One of the play’s many virtues is that it provides no easy explanation for Nicolas’s condition. It may spring from the divided loyalty he feels towards his divorced parents or it may have its origins in Pierre’s own difficult relationship with his father. But Zeller doesn’t analyse depression: he simply presents it as it frighteningly is. There’s a telling moment when Anne, seeking to play the role of a sympathetic mum, suggests to Nicolas that his problems may be the result of breaking up with a girl: Kynaston’s response is to curl himself into a ball and beat the floor in frustration at the facile nature of the idea. As Nicolas says, in Christopher Hampton’s limpid translation: “Sometimes I feel I’m not made for this life.” Zeller is a shrewd enough dramatist to show that even in a fraught situation there are fleeting moments of happiness. One comes when Pierre, a work-obsessed lawyer, is encouraged by Sofia to demonstrate the talent for dance that first attracted her to him. Nicolas spontaneously apes his dad’s exhibitionist hip-swaying and the stage suddenly floods with a joy that is just as quickly shattered. And, even though it seemed improbable that it would take three months for Nicolas’s absenteeism from school to be noticed, the work is ingeniously structured: there is a surprise ending that, far from being tricksy, reinforces the play’s direct access to the heart. Michael Longhurst’s immaculate production and Lizzie Clachan’s design underline the tension between bourgeois order and emotional chaos, and the acting throughout is excellent. John Light captures perfectly Pierre’s mix of guilt and concern and, suddenly kicking over a sofa in fury, movingly shows the powerlessness of a parent confronting filial depression. There is strong support from Amanda Abbington as the equally uncomprehending Anne, and from Amaka Okafor as Sofia, who sees Nicolas as an obstinate barrier to her own happiness. But the lasting image of the production is of Kynaston’s Nicolas, whose features suggest a total withdrawal from the world into his own inexplicable hell. The Son is at the Kiln, London, until 6 April.