President Bill Clinton yesterday announced emergency measures worth more than $10bn (£6.25m) to help farmers, the elderly and the poor cope with the worst drought to hit the eastern states since the Great Depression. The heatwave which has hung over the US since early July has caused more than 190 deaths, drained reservoirs, turned green fields brown, and emptied shops of fans and air conditioners. Mr Clinton said he would work with congress to provide $10bn of emergency assistance. Farming families in West Virginia and counties in five surrounding states would be offered low-interest loans. "We're also working with local governments and private agencies to help farmers get water and hay to keep their livestock alive," he said. A further $100m would be spent providing air conditioners and fans to poor families and old people. In Chicago alone, the heat has led to the death of 30 people - most of them pensioners without air conditioners. In Georgia, a 14-year-old bedridden boy died of heatstroke after his family's electricity was cut off. The power company blamed a misunderstanding between it, the boy's mother and her new landlord. North Carolina experienced temperatures of more than 38C (100F) for several days running, peaking at a record-breaking 40C (104F). Further north, the region around Washington DC is suffering its driest year since 1931, and Baltimore has only a month's supply of drinking water left in its reservoirs. New York is choking in the worst smog in 10 years and in Newark, New Jersey, workmen were photographed at the weekend painting public lawns with green paint. The agriculture secretary, Dan Glickman, said the ground in the mid-Atlantic and north-east was the driest it had been since the depression, with rainfall between 50% and 80% below normal. Water rationing has been introduced in many counties. The intense heat and water shortages have mainly affected the east of the country, leaving the American breadbasket in the midwest largely untouched. Mr Glickman said that although north-eastern cities might run short of fresh vegetables, food prices across the country would not be affected significantly. "Ironically, the heartland of America - Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, Nebraska, Iowa, all through the middle - they're doing pretty well now in terms of rainfall," Mr Glickman said. Temperatures in Chicago, Washington and New York dropped below 32C (90F) yesterday as a cooler front moved west. Forecasters say the weather should return to seasonal norms this week. But even normal rainfall would not restore the region's water reserves. "We need a couple of feet of water to get out of this. That's a couple of tropical storms," said James Baker, head of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration. "Droughts take a long time to set up, and they take a long time to get rid of. In some parts of the country, it may go through the winter."