Plans to build what would have been California's first major studio since the Depression have been scrapped in a move that has sent shockwaves through the industry. The decision by Steven Spielberg's DreamWorks production company will cost thousands of potential jobs at a time when Hollywood is already fearful because of the multimillion-dollar departure of economy-conscious new productions to Canada. News of the decision was announced in a terse statement by Jeffrey Katzenberg, who with David Geffen and Mr Spielberg was one of the three founders of DreamWorks. "It is clear that the move is no longer in DreamWorks' best interests," said Mr Katzenberg. "The move was simply not meant to be." Mr Spielberg said that they were still anxious to build their own studio, which had been one of the reasons for establishing DreamWorks. Plans to build the $250m studio at Playa Vista, near Los Angeles airport, have been under way for more than four years. The studio would have brought in around 4,000 film industry jobs and twice that number in construction work. The mayor of Los Angeles, Richard Riordan, had called the project "the biggest business win any city ever had". The studio would have been part of a 1,000-acre business and residential development on one of the few remaining undeveloped sites in the city. That the project would have been constructed on the Los Angeles area's last remaining wetlands had provoked protests from 90 environmental and residential groups. Residents' groups objected to the inevitable increase in traffic in the area, and environmentalists said it would lead to the destruction of irreplaceable wetlands. Objectors who portrayed Mr Spielberg and his colleagues as "DreamJerks" appeared to have lost the argument when the city council gave the go-ahead. Yesterday the Wetlands Action Network called the decision a victory for the environment. The long delays to the project have wearied the DreamWorks team, who have watched the industry take many economic knocks over the past months. A report issued last month showed that $2.8bn worth of film and television money and 23,000 jobs had crossed the border to Canada last year in order to benefit from production costs which are at least 25% less than Hollywood's. Salaries for technicians are lower over the border, and the Canadian government offers tax breaks. DreamWorks had already bought the land for $20m last April but will now seek to recoup its investment.