Anglesey It was a magic morning, an early winter day dawning under the palest sky. Looking from the cottage window across the shallow depression that drains, rush-bedded, to the sluggish Afon Cadnant near Menai Bridge, a carpet of silver mist spread across several acres. The early sun lit cows' heads but their bodies were wrapped in the silken blanket below; supernatural beasts walking on air. A grey heron flapped across the chill depression a few feet above the silver sea where cattle ears were twitching. Soon the big bird had gone over the ridge towards the sea. Ten minutes later the mist-pool had vanished, dispersed by the strengthening sun's rays. The mystery had gone, the beauty remained. Later that day we followed the north coast westwards, renewing acquaintance of four decades. The rocky indentations change very little but, looking inland, the entire northern half of the island now seems covered with wind turbines. Beyond Porth Wen, we scrambled by Hell's Mouth and the ancient fortress of Dinas Gynfor (close to Wales's northernmost headland) and in another mile came to Llanbadrig church. This stone structure crouches low to the cliff top; it's one of the oldest sites in all Wales and may pre-date AD440. Patrick is presumed to have established this church as a thanksgiving offering for his preservation after being shipwrecked on this rock-girt coast - Llanbadrig is the "Church of St Patrick". Standing in the breezy graveyard we looked almost due west across Cemaes Bay to the monstrous, slab-sided bulk of Wylfa Head nuclear power station - only a mile and a half away in distance but 15 centuries in time. Gulls were wheeling in the sky over our heads, oyster catchers busy on the shining strand below and a heron came in low from the direction of those whirling wind turbines. Beyond Wylfa Head the group flashing light of The Skerries was conspicuous above the cold and oily sea. Originally lit in 1717 it was the first permanent light to warn shipping on the west coast of England and Wales. Its 4m candelas can be seen for up to 17 miles.