For a man who sounds as if he should be a suicidal depressive, Damien Jurado appeared to be in remarkably good shape at the opening performance of his British tour. He had just flown in from his home town of Seattle, once known as the grunge capital of the American West Coast, and was now giving his first-ever European show in a decidedly difficult venue. He was perched on a flight case in the front of the Rough Trade record store in deepest Notting Hill Gate, and would have found it difficult to see his audience even if he had ever bothered to open his eyes. They were separated from him by racks of old-fashioned vinyl and signs like "Punk - American", and he had to be good just to keep their attention. It's been a great year for thoughtful, romantic and depressive singer-songwriters, thanks to the likes of Ron Sexsmith. Jurado fits perfectly into this venerable tradition because his songs have so many echoes of the unhappy heroes that have gone before him. He may be American, but there are uncanny reminders of the late Nick Drake in some of his songs, while even the title of his latest album, Rehearsals For Departure, hints at another celebrated folk-era casualty, Phil Ochs. Jurado has a fine line in tragic narrative, but makes it sound as if all the comparisons with other singers are accidental. He was, he explained, an enthusiastic punk until grunge came along, when he got so fed up with the post-Nirvana fads that swept Seattle that he retreated to his mum's house and began listening to her old folk records. The result, as displayed here, is an oddly compelling style. His guitar work is mostly very simple, though augmented with some reasonable Dylan-style harmonica work, while his singing is understated but gently effective. What makes Jurado so impressive is the strength of his songs, with their stories of unhappy, even fatal love affairs, drifting and alienation, often couched in disarmingly conversational lyrics. At his best, as with Ohio or the current single, Letters And Drawings (which he somehow forgot to perform), his songs have the simple strength of great country music. As for those folk influences, he finished with a quietly chilling version of the traditional murder ballad, Butcher's Boy, accompanied on acoustic guitar played very softly but in a style that was a still reminder of his early punk years. A cult hero in the making.