Is Tony Blair's vision for the health service realisable? At this year's Labour party conference he reminded delegates of Margaret Thatcher's defence of private health insurance: to be able to go into hospital "on the day I want, at the time I want, with the doctor I want". Mr Blair went one step further: "I want to go to the hospital of my choice, on the day I want, at the time I want. And I want it on the NHS." Ten weeks on and the NHS is moving towards another funding crisis, despite the most generous increase in resources for six years. Last week the British Medical Association questioned whether the NHS could any longer provide comprehensive care and announced a new review of healthcare finance. One day earlier, in an impressive speech, the health secretary conceded public expectations and changes in health technology were creating unprecedented demands on the NHS. Are the Tories right to insist that private insurance is the only solution? Even the BMA's leaders, firm upholders in the past of the principle of free healthcare available to all, said its review would have to look at restricting the NHS to a range of core services, imposing charges, or introducing private insurance. It would be easy to dismiss this latest funding panic as just part of the normal cycle of NHS life. Indeed, just over four years ago the last "crisis" occurred: a report from Healthcare 2000, an independent inquiry headed by the former chief executive of the NHS, Sir Duncan Nichol, which declared drastic action was needed if the health service was to survive into the next century - now only 18 days away. It demanded a public debate on drastic options: more tax funding, additional charges for treatment, more private insurance or restrictions on services. The Tory health secretary at the time, Stephen Dorrell, rejected the conclusions and dismissed the idea that the competition for resources within the existing NHS was unsustainable. The gap between what is medically feasible and what society can afford has never been so wide. Rising public expectations, changing medical technology and new miracle drugs are not new, but the gap they are creating is qualitatively different than in the previous 51 years of the NHS. Where the Tories and BMA leaders are wrong is in assuming that private insurance can close the gap. Let them look at the US, the world's biggest private medical market, where new restrictions and curbs on medical treatment are systematically being introduced by private insurers. The same restrictions are being copied here by British private providers. The gap no longer just affects the public sector. There are two complementary ways in which the gap can be narrowed. The first, already adopted by the government and for the first time publicly acknowledged by the health secretary, is by more rigorous rationing. This requires all new treatments to be both clinically sound and cost effective, while ensuring existing ineffective treatments are eliminated. This is the job of the new National Institute for Clinical Excellence, addressed by the health secretary last week. But ministers who oppose tax rises should explore new ways of raising more public funds. Could we adopt some element of the universal state health insurance schemes, used widely across the continent? They raise more funds, do not require tax rises, and do not conflict with fundamental NHS principles: a comprehensive service, free at the point of use, available to all regardless of ability to pay, according to clinical need. Bismarck, not Beveridge, might help realise the Blair dream.