Earlier this year a Gallup poll of 1,600 people over 50 found 1 in 20 felt they had been refused treatment on the grounds of their age - and 1 in 10 (almost 2m people if extrapolated nationwide) felt they had been treated differently since hitting 50. Age Concern, the pressure group which commissioned the April survey, appealed to the public and health professionals for more evidence about age discrimination in the health service. Over 1,000 people responded. Today's report, based on a close analysis of 150 cases, portrays a stark picture of systemic ageism within the NHS. It sets out the barriers which people over 50 face obtaining treatment, the less caring attitudes of health staff, and the way the fear of retaliation restricts complaints. The patient's charter is unequivocal about the importance of equal access to health care: "You have the right to receive health care on the basis of your clinical need, not on your ability to pay, your lifestyle, or any other factor." Ministers reiterated this pledge at the time of the April survey. The General Medical Council's code of good practice upholds the same clinical need principle. Yet today's report sets out some startling findings from earlier research: women aged 65 or over are not routinely invited for breast screening, even though 63% of all deaths from breast cancer occur in this age group; similarly, although 66% of heart attacks involve people aged 65 or over, 20% of coronary care units operate an age-related admissions policy - and 40% attach age restrictions to the use of clot-busting drugs. Both the Royal College of Physicians and the Medical Research Council have conceded that age discrimination within the NHS has become a significant problem. What should be done? Back in 1997 when Labour was in opposition, its shadow health secretary promised to set up an inquiry into ageism. This would be an important first step in a society in which the over 65s will increase at 10 times the overall rate of the population in the next 40 years. No one should be excluded from health treatment on age grounds alone, because ageing does happen at a uniform rate. What is needed in a health service which has to ration its limited resources is the development of "biological" rather than "chronological" indicators on the potential benefits of treatment. Rationing by age is wrong; rationing according to the ability to benefit is justified.