'Gerald Durrell was magic,' declared Sir David Attenborough at the magician's funeral in 1995. Reading Douglas Botting's solid and sympathetic biography, it seems fair comment. He was, indeed, a man possessed of enormous enthusiasms, infectious energy and a multitude of gifts - one of the finest and most lyrical of nature writers in English, a self-taught naturalist of the highest rank, a feisty campaigner for animal conservation, a pioneer in the breeding of endangered species in captivity, founder of the Jersey Wildlife Preservation Trust (now named after him) and a supremely talented television performer and lecturer. Never contaminated by a university education, he maintained the wide-eyed curiosity and utter commitment of the self-taught to the very end of his days. Indeed, when his first great book, The Overloaded Ark, was published in 1953, the critic Geoffrey Grigson astutely observed that Durrell's approach to animal conservation and the wonders of nature was essentially that of a small boy in the April holidays fascinated by insects under stones, beasties in caves and birds in the trees, while remaining blissfully indifferent to the dangers, the drudgery, the difficulties involved. His myriad expeditions to such places as Assam, Belize, British Guyana, Madagascar, Mauritius and Sierra Leone were all embarked upon with that same mixture of wonder and excitement. This childlike quality - or immaturity, as his first wife ended up seeing it - may well have owed much to Durrell's start in life. His father died of a suspected brain haemorrhage when Gerald was only three. The event appears not to have made a particular impact on him at the time, but it bound him in a tight, mutually supportive and emotionally intricate relationship with his mother. She wholeheartedly supported his first steps as a collector, even if the rest of his family was driven to distraction by finding scorpions in empty matchboxes, leeches in jam-jars and snakes in the bath. There is more than a suggestion in this book that Gerald was encouraged by her to remain a child longer than was good for him. When the family moved to Corfu, in the main because novelist brother Lawrence could not stand the awful British weather, Gerald's childhood and early adolescence took on an Eden-like quality in what Botting describes as 'a kind of Mediterranean Congo peopled with natives and crawling with wildlife'. It certainly seemed to Gerald a glorious, exotic, unspoilt paradise on earth where, without even having to think too much about it, he could do what he wanted. What he wanted was to indulge his passion for animals. Eccentric as this upbringing was, it provided him with an excellent start to his career as collector and animal enthusiast. As is so often the case, however, the qualities that make for professional and public success do not necessarily enhance a private life. Although Botting is careful always to balance a negative comment with a positive one, for Gerald, like many children who find it hard to grow up, human beings were more difficult to live with than animals. Sunny, funny and extraordinarily creative when the world was being kind to him, he could react very badly indeed when it turned nasty. He may well have been driven by a fear that his life's work was in vain and that nothing he would or could do would halt the inexorable tide of environmental destruction wrought by the hand of man. In addition, the family genes were loaded with depression - his mother suffered and so did brother Lawrence - and there was a familial pattern of heavy drinking. His mother was a catastrophe from which, if his wife is to be believed, he never really recovered. Utterly devoted to his mother, he recoiled from her death, refused to grieve and coped in the way he always handled setbacks, by drinking. Whatever the precise reasons for his depression, drinking and sporadic attacks of verbal aggression, their persistence took their toll on those around him. His first marriage, which began with a dramatic elopement (his wife was never to meet any members of her family again) ended with her feeling she had married a zoo not a human being. He became suicidal, drank even more prodigiously and ended up being treated for depression and alcohol abuse in a private clinic in London. His marriage broke up. His isolation did not last long. He met, wooed and married Lee McGeorge, a beautiful zoology graduate from Tennessee, 30 years his junior, founded his zoo, developed his trust and became the grand old man of conservation, capable now and again of a volcanic explosion against enemies, such as Lord Zuckerman of London Zoo, who were foolish enough to insist that zoology was for scientists and not animals. When he died, the boy who had learnt of the wonders of the natural world on Corfu had become a world figure, honoured by universities, sought after by royalty and fêted as a star. To the end, he remained an intriguing mixture of hope and despair - at one moment envisaging the world as being 'destroyed at the speed of an Exocet and we are riding about on a bicycle', at another leaving a letter in a time capsule sunk beneath Jersey Trust's interpretative centre in which he expressed the hope that those who might one day read it would 'be grateful for having been born into such a magical world'.