The government is about to embark on an offensive against bad, dangerous and poorly performing GPs by giving health authorities powers to suspend them for the first time in nearly 50 years. A report by the chief medical officer, Liam Donaldson, to be published on Friday, will spell out the need for radical change. Under the present rules even a GP who is convicted by a court for murder, manslaughter or sexual offences against a patient cannot be removed from his or her job with the NHS for at least a month and sometimes much longer, leaving patients at risk. The problem lies with the status of GPs. Since 1948 when the NHS began, they have been independent contractors, not salaried employees of their health authority. Frustrated health authorities have been forced to embark on a long and bureaucratic process which can take years to suspend a GP or terminate his or her contract. While GPs are regarded as the backbone of the health service and the vast majority are first rate, the chief medical officer's report will make it clear there are concerns that some family doctors operate in complete isolation, with no peer group to review their work or blow the whistle if things go badly wrong, as there always is in hospital. Among them are the mavericks, those who fail to keep up with new developments in medicine and those who slip into mental illness and crime. Family doctors have not been required to take part in any audit of their results. Only half - about 18,000 - are members of the professional body, the Royal College of General Practitioners, which sets standards and offers voluntary assessment. If a GP is suspected of poor performance or criminal conduct, perhaps after complaints from patients, the health authority can only start a very long and bureaucractic process lumbering into action. To suspend or dismiss a GP, the health authority has to apply to the NHS tribunal, which will take four to six weeks even to begin to consider the case. Serious complaints against a GP are likely to be referred to the disciplinary body, the General Medical Council. However, if it or the police are investigating, the NHS tribunal puts its own inquiries on hold and will not proceed until a decision is reached. In the meantime, an errant or incompetent GP will still be seeing patients who cannot be warned that he or she is under investigation. The report will lay out the government's plans to give health authorities powers to suspend a GP immediately. The future of the NHS tribunal itself must be in doubt. The report will specify that the government's NHS inspectorate - the newly launched commission for clinical excellence - will investigate the competence of every GP practice, not just primary care groups, and it will become compulsory for all GPs to take part in clinical audits. Health authorities are likely to be relieved to be given suspension powers after years of trying to deal with some worrying cases with their hands tied. Clare Dodgson, chief executive of Sunderland health authority, said last night: "I would welcome any such changes if they come about, because in a small number of very difficult cases the system is complex and difficult to understand, and can take a long time. We need the ability to take swift but responsible action. "This is about the patient. This is not about the vested interests of any professional group, whether management, patient or anything else. If you were charged with fraud or harassment, you would expect to be suspended without prejudice and have a fair hearing of your case." Concern - but no suspension Doctors whom health authorities were unable to suspend: In 1996, a single-handed GP from Essex had been found to be in breach of his terms of service on five occasions. 1. He was said to have repeatedly failed either to phone or visit an elderly patient with severe breathing difficulties. 2. While the GP was deputising for another doctor, a 73-year-old man with emphysema and prostate difficulties was taken to hospital and died while the doctor was treating another patient. Defending himself from a complaint brought by the relatives, he shouted abuse at the widow and called her a liar. 3. He failed to keep adequate records. 4. He failed to properly examine or follow up a woman suspected of breast cancer who later died of the disease. 5. He failed to respond to a patient with a hip replace ment and chronic obstructive airways disease who had developed pain in the chest and breathing difficulties. The health authority, unable to dismiss the GP, asked the NHS tribunal to remove him from its list on the basis that the doctor repeatedly disregarded the clinical needs of his patients. Allegations about a Mersey side GP concerning the sexual abuse of female patients and prescribing offences, including offences involving Class A drugs such as heroin, came to the attention of his health authority. Although they were concerned for the safety of his patients, the health authority's officers could not suspend him pending invest- igations. A sexual abuse allegation was taken to the General Medical Council by one female patient, but the GMC declined to take action. The health authority put a second complaint to the GMC, alleging the doctor was not fully competent. The GMC decided he should work under supervision for six months. The authority went to the NHS tribunal for his dismissal.