A new American study shatters the hopes of what feminism has sought to achieve and bleakly concludes that women are not yet free from oppression. The study, published by the American Psychological Association, pours cold water on the notion that girl power can put women in charge of their own destiny. It found that despite all the achievements of feminism over 30 years, women are still failing to have control over their lives. Women continue to suffer from depression or inequality in social conditions, employment and relationships, the study of more than 1,100 American women of all ages and social backgrounds revealed. They told researchers they felt miserable and unappreciated as they were left to shoulder the burden of housework and child care. One of the authors, Susan Nolen-Hoeksema, a psychologist at Michigan university, said: "The grinding burden of being a women is a desperate cycle of boring responsibilities and low social powers." She said gender differences started early when boys were taught to deal with emotionally charged situations, while girls were consoled with a hug. She said women were more likely than men "to ruminate passively and repetitively focus on a situation" when they were feeling sad or depressed. "Rumination drains women of motivation, persistence and problem solving skills to change their situation," she said. "Failing to do what one can to overcome stressful situations." The study, published in November's Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, found that because of women's lower status, they experience more negative events and have less control over important areas of their lives than men. Some of the most frequently cited complaints include work overload and an unequal balance of power and status in relationships. Although women make less money than men, they appear to work more hours when the extra roles they perform are taken into consideration. In addition, women are increasingly sandwiched between caring for children and caring for old and sick family members, and they feel less affirmed and appreciated by their partners. In Britain, reports of increasing depression among young men overshadow the fact that more women suffer symptoms of depression - 40% of women compared to less than 20% of men. Two thirds of those who receive electroconvulsive therapy for depression are women. Dorothy Rowe, a British author and psychologist, said doctors had been looking at depression as a physical ailment and had been handing out drugs to counter it. "Once housewives got Valium to shut them up, now its Prozac," she said. "But we get depressed when we blame ourselves for what's gone wrong in our lives, thinking we are bad. Girls are especially prone because they are brought up like that - if you're not a good girl people won't love you." Feminism had failed depressed women, she claimed, because it had never got to grips with that kind of issue. The study says women carry a triad of vulnerabilities to depressive symptoms: more chronic strain, a greater tendency to ruminate, and a lower sense of control over their lives. To change this, women need to be helped to achieve a greater sense of control over their circumstances and to engage in problem solving.