Supermarket chains have for the first time taken an equal share of the health and beauty market as they nudge control from specialist stores such as Boots and Superdrug, according to a retail analyst's report published today. Verdict Research believes the £11bn market will polarise, with the grocers having a "pile it high and sell it cheap" policy, while independent operators specialise in "premium pampering". The specialist retailers, such as Boots, will lose out, says Verdict. The researchers say the first signs of Boots' demise are already apparent. According to the Verdict survey 42% of the cash spent on toiletries, cosmetics and over-the-counter medicines went into supermarket tills last year, compared with 40% 12 months earlier. But the specialists' share has declined from 46% to 42%. Boots accounts for about a quarter of the market. Verdict says the health and beauty business has been "largely bypassed" by increasing price competition in the UK and still offers "relatively fat profit margins". But it believes the arrival in Britain of the American discount store, Wal-Mart, will herald a big change. Asda, which was purchased by Wal-Mart in the summer, "has already been leading the price war" on toiletries, the researchers say. "Wal-Mart will want to grab more of this market and will drive volumes with lower prices." The Verdict report, entitled Health &amp; Beauty Retailers 1999, will not be welcomed by Boots. The chemist's shares almost halved this year, despite strong trading, as investors and analysts became concerned about the threat posed by Wal-Mart threat. But Boots has steadfastly maintained that it will not get involved in a price war. It claims its customers are looking for quality and good service as much as low prices, and is to start offering in-store alternative therapies, such as reflexology and aromatherapy. Last week Boots' chairman, Lord Blyth, poured scorn on the threat posed by Wal-Mart. He said customers would discover that shopping at Wal-Mart "ain't a pleasure" and described the American company's performance in Ger- many as "nothing to write home about". He said Boots had successfully fought off attacks by the big UK supermarkets over several years, and that he did not expect the company to be beaten on price as suppliers would probably offer it the same deals as they offered Wal-Mart. He also criticised City analysts and traders for their "lemming-like" behaviour, which had "pushed Boots shares ever lower this year".