Which side of the fence do you sit on in the great drugs debate? Do you believe that all drugs should be banned, with stiff prison sentences for those who use or deal in them? Or are you at the other end of the spectrum and believe that soft drugs such as marijuana should be legalised? And where does alcohol and mental health come into this debate? No matter where your sympathies lie, there is no doubt that misuse of hard drugs is fuelling the crime wave. Addicts steal to pay for their daily hits. Equally, people who abuse alcohol are more likely to become involved in fights. Last week, Newham Drugs Action Team, responsible for co-ordinating drugs work across the east London borough, launched the combined arrest referral scheme. It targets both adult and young offenders with drug, drink or mental health problems - or a combination of these. Other registered schemes in England and Wales target only adult detainees with a drugs problem, ignoring alcohol and mental health problems, and young people. Referral schemes arrived from the US 10 years ago and have been demonstrated to be effective in fast-tracking offenders with a drugs habit into treatment services. Long-term studies in the US and UK show that treatment works for drug addicts. Detainees using the service will not be able to avoid the normal process of law as the scheme works in parallel with the criminal justice system. Based in police stations, arrest referral staff work closely with custody officers in identifying potential candidates for the scheme who are then confidentially assessed for onward referral to a treatment service, or provided with information, advice or counselling. To gain an understanding of the scale of the problem, consider the following statistics: • Almost four-fifths of arrests in Newham are due to drugs, alcohol, mental health problems, or a combination of these. • Property crime accounts for nearly half of all offences by illicit drug users. • Just over one in 10 have had contact with a treatment service, leaving 89% who have had no contact. Ali Osman (not his real name) forms part of this 89%. Ali is 21 years old and lives in overcrowded conditions with his mother, brothers and sisters. At 16, he started tak ing cannabis and became involved in petty crime. Within a year, he had progressed to class A drugs such as crack cocaine and heroin - to the tune of £400 per week. To finance his habit he would embark on crime sprees for which he served time. Following a recent arrest for car theft, he was referred to the combined arrest referral scheme and then directed to a local drugs agency. Ali obtained bail and made his first contact with a treatment service. Previously, he had never heard of treatment agencies that could help people like him. Ali is now engaged in a structured rehabilitation programme. Problematic alcohol use has been identified as a big issue in over a third of all detainees, a significant number being arrested for violent crime. Few, if any, problem drinkers have access to treatment services. Newham's scheme is an attempt to ensure that people with multiple problems receive support for all their needs. For example, one in 10 problem drinkers have a history of mental health problems, and yet the majority of these are treated for their mental illness only. Young people are affected as well. We estimate that 1,400 people under 18 are arrested each year for taking drugs, and drug-related crime accounts for the highest proportion of offences by young arrestees. The scheme, funded by the health authority, social services, the probation service and the Stratford Development Partnership, aims to assess more than 1,000 adults and young people in its first year. Drug and alcohol treatment services in Newham are prioritising clients from the scheme and seeing people within a week. Treatment agencies have guaranteed that up to 33 new referrals per week can be seen. People with acute mental health problems will be admitted to mental health services straight away. Drugs are the scourge of many societies. Abusing alcohol increases violence on our streets. And people with mental health problems can commit crimes because of their illness, no matter what their age. Many of these people will go on to re-offend. We can begin to break the cycle by providing support for their addiction or health problem. • Robin Wales is the leader of Newham council. A conference called Tackling Drugs in Newham will take place on Friday at Stratford Town Hall, east London. Further details from Cindy Bolstridge, Drugs Action Team (tel: 0181-472 1430, ext 23434).