Change is better As a twentysomething who has suffered from depression, Tracy McVeigh's article (News, last week) caught my eye. I agree to a certain extent with her comments. However, I think it's way past time we saw depression as a positive thing (which is especially difficult when one is going through it). Having had time to recover from my depression I see it as a process of change for the better. But the article gave the impression that our future holds more depression and overwork, that women cannot achieve equality and that feminism has failed us. I achieved freedom from depression by recognising my own desires, however small, and following them through. We need to empower ourselves to make the right choices for ourselves. We need to release ourselves from the expectations of society and choose our own way. Amy Wright, Moseley, Birmingham Loo's Waterloo Andrew Smith repeats the common derivation of 'loo' as coming from the old warning shout of ' gardez l'eau ' (Magazine, last week). There are a number of other explanations, however. One of the more intriguing is that, once the French had called the newfangled WC 'le water', the English, with certain events of 1815 in mind, simply took the last syllable of the famous battle. Harvey R. Cole, Winchester Sub Standard Harold Evans may remember the Evening Standard fondly from across the Atlantic (Comment, last week), but in the 16 years I have lived in London it has been an irritatingly smug, complacent right-wing rag aimed at well-heeled commuters and of virtually no interest to Londoners as a whole. London deserves better. Graham Larkbey, London E17 Deluded south Your editorial 'One nation party - Two nation state' (Comment, last week) had me wondering if you had somehow confused Guy Fawke's night with April Fool's day. Price of an average semi in London over £250K; average price in Wolverhampton, one fifth of this. Average pay in London £520 per week... and £400 in the rest of the country. Thank heavens southerners can't do simple sums. Bernard Moore, Middlesbrough, Cleveland