I am 50 years old and was until recently a PA to a senior partner in a large firm of City solicitors. I was doing the job well until March when I was hit by depression and hospitalised. My firm was patient and waited more than two months for me, but when I went back it was clear that I could not do the job full-time. At the beginning of August I was made redundant; my confidence was shattered again. Three weeks on, I am now thinking about what to do. My instinct is to go for a demanding but part-time job, but I don't want to do legal work any more and find myself attracted to the charity sector. What do I say and how much do I tell my prospective employers? Name withheld You make no mention about whether your depression was directly job-related or not, and I think that this significantly affects your choice. So think carefully about your reasons for wanting a stressful job. Perhaps you should look for a job that is interesting and stimulating but not too high-powered. You need work that will encourage you to feel good about yourself and your skills. Working in the charitable, education, health or environmental sectors could give you this, and temping would be a good way to explore the various options. Look at the interests you have outside work to see if any of these could lead to a satisfying career. My opinion is that one should treat mental health issues in the same way as physical health issues. If an illness is likely to be recurrent and will affect your work then you need to discuss it with prospective employers. But if you had a one-off problem, then don't mention it unless you are asked directly. Don't lie, just keep it in proportion. One approach could be to include your depression in your skills and experiences, and look for a job that would capitalise on it, such as working for a mental health charity. Remember that a sense of personal achievement can be a safeguard against further bouts of depression, as can the knowledge that you have been strong enough to regain a fulfilling and independent lifestyle so quickly. • Freda can be contacted at 38 Nottingham Road, Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leics LE65 1DQ. Tel/fax 01530 413987