Depression is the second greatest cause of death after heart disease in affluent Europe and America, according to figures from the World Health Organisation. The findings surprised even the WHO officials, who yesterday published their annual report on the health of the 6bn people on the planet. For the first time, they published statistics not only for mortality from disease, but for combined premature death and disability. Using what they called the Daly (disability adjusted life year), WHO experts measured the real burden of disease and ill health. In the high income countries of the west, they found that neuropsychiatric conditions from depression to alcohol or drug dependence, dementia and panic disorder accounted for 23% of the disease burden, heart disease 18% and cancers 15%. 'Neuropsychiatric conditions have been ignored for a long time as they are absent from cause of death lists,' said the WHO report. 'However, when disease burden measurement includes time lived with a disability, several of the neuropsychiatric disorders become leading causes of disease burden worldwide.' It was on the rise throughout the world, and in some developing countries, where depression might not be recognised in the same way as in the west, it was probably still being underestimated. Depressive illness can be caused by radical changes for the worse in people's lives and expectations. David Nabarro, in charge of the WHO's roll back malaria project, pointed to the former Soviet Union. 'We have seen during the late 1980s and early 1990s a massive increase in the mortality of adult men. I suspect we don't have the full story but it may have been associated with people's perceptions of the future.' The deaths were due to binge drinking and changes in lifestyle associated with greater violence, he said. Heart disease and stroke were the other most significant causes of lost years of active life, not only in higher income countries, but also increasingly in the developing world which was fast adopting a western way of life, filled with junk food, cigarettes and lack of exercise. It has been estimated that by 2020 heart disease would be the greatest single cause of death. Lung cancer caused by smoking was the biggest problem among the cancers. WHO director general Gro Harlem Brundtland has declared war on the tobacco industry which, said the report, 'is reluctantly surrendering its secrets' about the addictive nature of nicotine rated by some experts as worse than heroin. The report warned that the death toll from smoking may be seriously underestimated. Recent studies showed one in two smokers died of the habit. If current trends continued tobacco would kill 10m people a year by 2030. Diseases such as tuberculosis, malaria, cholera, and pneumonia were causing concern. 'Possibly 1-2m die because of malaria each year. That is absolutely unnecessary,' said Dr Nabarro. For the first time, the report took a strong stand on the economic folly of allowing poor people to suffer from disease. Countries in the developing world that wanted to prosper needed healthy citizens to create wealth rather than becoming a drain on resources. For example, in Cameroon, Indonesia, Nigeria, Sri Lanka and Sudan, said the report, less than 2% of GDP was spent on health. The reality was that this 'perpetuates the cycle of poverty'. It was essential that governments recognised the economic sense in providing healthcare for their people and focused resources not on hi-tech hospitals for the few but on vaccines and malaria tablets for the many.