Psychiatrists were warned yesterday not to misdiagnose unhappiness as depression, converting human problems into "illness" and handing out medication to those who were not unwell. Edward Shorter, a psychiatrist and medical historian of the university of Toronto, was speaking in London at an international meeting under the auspices of the World Health Organisation to discuss the "social and economic timebomb" of depression. The WHO maintains that depression is at epidemic proportions worldwide. Recently it announced that major depression will be the world's second most debilitating disease within 20 years. Only cardiovascular disease will have a bigger impact in terms of productive working years lost. But psychiatrists are divided on the true extent of depression. Prof Shorter argued that depression had increased with the advent of drugs to treat it - in particular the selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors, or SSRIs, of which the most famous was Prozac, which did not make patients feel leaden and gain weight as they had on earlier antidepressants. When SSRIs took off in the United States, Prozac became a street drug, sold outside of pharmacies, and people who were not depressed but who were unhappy began to seek it out. "Unhappiness, as we know, responds readily if not durably to ethanol [alcohol]. It certainly responds to such street drugs as cocaine. And it responds, as a generation of users can now testify, to SSRIs," he told the meeting. When discussing the worldwide burden of depression "we therefore do well to keep in mind that there is indeed an enormous worldwide burden of unhappiness, that some of this unhappiness is the result of psychiatric illness, and, finally, that some of this illness is clinical depression." Despite this view, Arthur Kleinman of the Harvard medical school, chairing he conference, said: "Depression will have an increasing impact on societies and economies everywhere but is still regarded with benign neglect by most people in most countries." In an introductory paper for delegates, Ann Dawson of the WHO, together with Prof Kleinman and colleagues, talked of the trends behind the current "global crisis in mental health". "Countries have been left reeling from massive societal changes brought about by rapid urbanisation, chaotic modernisation, and the widespread hardships associated with efforts at economic development and restructuring. "Disruptions in cultural practices, social routines and 'traditional' work and family roles have been accompanied by increased rates of violence, alcoholism, drug abuse and suicide."