The stereotype of miserable Midlanders took a knock yesterday after a survey suggested they are less likely to have depression. The region has the smallest proportion of consulations with GPs concerned with depression, according to figures released at the start of National Depression Week. Wales has the highest. IMS Health, which carried out the survey, took anonymous records of 592,795 consulations with GPs nationwide last year. The percentage of depression complaints in the Midlands was lower at 1.1% than the south-east at 1.2%, the south-west (1.6%), Scotland and Northern Ireland (1.7%), and Wales (1.9%). Chris Manning, of the National Depression Campaign, said: 'The variation in figures between the regions is down to factors like unemployment, deprivation and money worries.' But, he said, the figures would be affected by other factors, including the number of people with depression actually prepared to see their GP, and the willingness of the GP to diagnose the patient. Dr Manning, who has had had depression for 15 years, said he had heard of cases where doctors had told patients to 'pull yourself together'. Or in one case: 'You just have to accept that you are not one of life's little sunbeams.' Doctors were also accused of saving better and more expensive drugs, such as Prozac and so-called SSRIs, for younger people, and giving elderly patients tricyclic drugs, which have worse side-effects. And the report says that six out of 10 patients are prescribed anti-depressant drugs for less than six months, the recommended minimum. But the amount of surgery time spent dealing with depression-hit patients has increased from 4 million to 9 million hours between 1994 and 1998. Depression costs the nation more than £8bn a year, the report says. 'There are more people suf fering from depression in Britain today than asthma and diabetes combined. It is a major problem,' said Dr Manning. One in four of the population suffered depression at some point in their lives. Four thousand people suffering depression committed suicide each year. Simon Chapman, chairman of the campaign, said: 'It may not be that depression is becoming any more common. I think it is maybe that GPs are recognising depression more and more people are presenting themselves for treatment.' According to the survey, money worries are the most likely trigger of depression, cited by 88% of people, followed closely by death and illness in the family, work worries and marriage or relationship problems. Biological factors such as hormonal or chemical imbalances were thought less important. Nick Ross, the broadcaster, patron of the National Depression Campaign, yesterday spoke of his battle against depression as a student. 'Finding support services was an absolute transformation. They encouraged me to see a GP and I was pulled out of the depression very very quickly by a whole series of treatment and help. 'If that help had not been there, then I don't know what the outcome would have been.'