In order to escape relegation trouble, I always feel it is necessary for a team to average slightly more than a point a game over the season. A glance at the points totals of the present bottom teams might suggest that this will be one campaign in which such a tally will not be necessary, but I think that it would be very dangerous for any manager above the drop zone to take anything for granted. Anybody who has spent any time at all in professional football will appreciate how swiftly situations can change. Hence the fact that I prefer to look upon the unusually low points totals of teams like Sheffield Wednesday, Watford, Derby and Bradford as merely something of an anomaly that is unlikely to last. When Coventry were in this position, in my first season as manager in 1996/97, my appointment (in November) was preceded by only one win and nine points from 12 games, and followed by a defeat at the hands of Gillingham in the Coca-Cola Cup third round, a draw at Wimbledon and then three 2-1 losses on the trot. So, by the time of the match against Newcastle - then in second place - on 17 December, we had 10 points from 16 matches. But against all expectations, we beat the Magpies and also took maximum points from our next three matches and a point from the game with Sunderland, to lift ourselves from 19th position to 12th. As if to emphasise the topsy-turvey nature of English football, we then sunk back into trouble and it was not until the last match of the season - when Coventry achieved one of the most emotion-charged wins in their history, at Tottenham - that we were able to climb to safety. Without wishing to come across as being patronising, I think that any manager who has gone through an experience like that would need to be a sadist not to feel sorry for the likes of Danny Wilson. During that first season at Coventry, I remember that I was almost too embarrassed to be seen in public. Managers tend to be much more conscious of the effect that football can have on people's lives than the players, and such was my sensitivity about Coventry's plight that I imagined the public making negative judgments of me as a person as well as a football professional. My pride and self-confidence took such a battering that I seriously questioned whether I was cut out for the job and, for the first time in my entire career, started thinking of what I could do to earn a living outside the game. Strange as it might seem, the memories of the times that I had got out of bad spells as a player were of no help to me. At that time, there is little doubt that I owed a lot to my former Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson. At times like these, it is important for managers to have other managers they can confide in and Howard - who got used to starting his day with a telephone chat with me - was very much my counsellor. When I introduced myself as his 'manic depressive' friend, I do not think I was entirely joking. Since then, I have become increasingly more philosophical about football management in general, and the relegation zone in particular. Any manager can easily find himself in relegation trouble - those who have never done so are very lucky - and any manager can easily get out of it. I have to laugh sometimes when I hear the view that some managers should attempt to make themselves more 'qualified'. No matter how many courses we take, the bottom line is that there are a number of situations that are beyond our control. In that respect, there is no need for me to go into the problems that Danny Wilson experienced with his former Italian stars Paolo Di Canio and Benito Carbone. Suffice it to say that, in view of the men talities of many top-class footballers nowadays, any manager who can claim not to have encountered such problems - and that includes me - can count himself fortunate. On the premise that size really does matter in football, the position of a club of Sheffield Wednesday's stature has inevitably come as one of the season's biggest surprises. Less difficult to predict was that, of the three Premiership newcomers, Sunderland would be the team in the least danger of being relegated. I must admit that I did not expect them to be as high in the table as they are, although in retrospect, I appreciate why they've proved me wrong. They have an excellent team shape for a start - and they also have one of the most inspiring crowds. It is a different story for clubs like Watford and Bradford - indeed, any clubs who have no background as giants of the game and who do well just to survive in the top-flight. It is a long, difficult process, as Coventry have found. At our financial level, building a successful team is all about selling players in order to buy, and wheeling and dealing. Last week, a Leicester player was quoted as saying that one of the differences between his club and Coventry was that we had spent much more heavily in the summer - to the tune of around £11 million - in order to avoid relegation. In fact, after taking into account my sales, our net expenditure was £500,000... lower than theirs. Since I became Coventry manager, incoming transfers have totalled £30m and outgoings £27m. So in real terms, we have spent just £1m a season. It seems to have paid off for us on the field - but I take nothing for granted. I have been in the game too long to be lured into thinking that we cannot still end up where Sheffield Wednesday are.