If the orgy of 'unrestrained speculation' in the stock market does not stop, it will 'bring about a general depression involving the whole country'. No, Alan Greenspan, chairman of the US Federal Reserve has not suddenly decided to make his warnings about the rise in US shares a bit more explicit. The comments were made in the summer of 1929 by investment banker Paul M Warburg. He was dismissed as a scaremonger and accused of failing to understand the changes in the US economy. Five months later, he was proved dramatically right, as Wall Street staged its biggest-ever crash. Share prices plunged; fortunes were lost. Eleven investment bankers were reported to have committed suicide on the day of the crash alone. It took a quarter of a century for share prices to recover their pre-crash value in real terms. Seventy years to the day since the Wall Street Crash, the similarities between the US stock market now and in the late Twenties are striking. The inexorable rise of the past five years mirrors that in the five years leading to the 1929 crash. Since the end of 1994, the Dow Jones Industrial Average has risen almost threefold: in the late Twenties, the New York Times average of 25 industrial shares soared from 134 points at the end of 1924 to 449 just before the crash. Then, the theory was that the staggering rise was justified by new technologies which were transforming American industry. Wireless technology was revolutionising communications; railroads, automobiles and new-fangled flying machines were revolutionising transport; the government was proving itself adept at managing growth without inflation. Now, the talk is of a 'new paradigm'. New technologies such as the Internet are revolutionising the world economy. Governments have tamed the inflationary beast. We have entered a new era of low interest rates and steady growth. Companies such as Amazon.com and Microsoft have seen their shares soar as much as twentyfold. But the markets have been rising strongly for years. Setbacks such as the 1987 crash were shrugged off, and the gloomy pundits who have been wary of the market for years have been wrongfooted. There are plenty of theories besides the new economic paradigm. There is the growth in retail investment, for example. So far this year, private investors have put $112 billion into mutual funds alone. Or there is demand for equities by governments moving out of pay-as-you-go pensions. Or there are the wealthy Japanese investors wanting to invest outside their own beleaguered economy. There is, of course, also a lot of evidence to support a 'new paradigm' view. In particular, profits growth has been very strong. And, although unemployment has continued to decline, wage pressures have decreased in recent quarters. As a result, many commentators suggest that the old macroeconomic textbooks should now be torn up. This is entirely consistent with past bubble-type developments. In his now-famous report, Bubble Trouble, Stephen King of HSBC said last year: 'There are also signs that investors have forgotten that what goes up can come down.' John Speirs of financial adviser Best Investment said: 'Most private investors now think of a dip as a good buying opportunity. One day it won't be.' That is what worries stock market historian David Schwarz. When bear markets start, they can go on for a long time: those who buy in the dips can lose out as the dips get ever lower. Schwarz warns those who believe this bull market can go on for ever: 'When shares rise very strongly in any 10-year period, the next 20 years are usually profitless, after allowing for inflation. Eighteen times this century there have been 10 consecutive years of strong rises. In 14 cases, prices have dropped over the next 20 years. In the rest, the rises were less than 1 per cent.' History, however, does not always repeat itself. The Eighties proved an exception to the theory: a strong rise in that decade has been followed by an even stronger one in this. That could mean the theory is wrong - or that the next decade will be so bad it will reverse the gains of the Nineties. Such reverses do give the lie to the theory that equity investment always pays. Starting with 1929, crashes have had a habit of occurring in October: there was 1987 and the wobble three years later. It does not mean there will be another this month, but investors will be relieved when November comes.