A positive attitude can help us succeed in almost every aspect of our lives. But can we use our minds to overcome health problems which normally only respond to medication? Evidence from the fast-developing new medical discipline psychoneuroimmunology (PNI) suggests the answer is yes. It's very likely that the way we think, feel and act influences the way our bodies function. So can you think yourself well? Here are three people who have done just that. Autogenic training Morris Clifford, 52, teacher, West Yorkshire Work pressures increased the frequency and duration of Morris's migraine attacks. Autogenic training, a method of allowing the mind to calm itself by switching off the body's "fight or flight" stress responses, has eliminated the problem altogether. "I always had three or four really bad migraines a year with visual disturbance and sickness, then three years ago, an OFSTED inspection really upped the stress levels at school and I began waking at night at least once a week with a throbbing, one-sided migraine which left me completely wiped out the next day. My GP was about to prescribe me beta-blockers, but I mentioned that I was going to try a course of autogenic training. He suggested I saw how this course went first. "My wife and I learned together. We went for eight one-hour sessions with a therapist. The first involved an assessment of our life histories and medical background, and then we were taught a series of mental exercises to practice at home. The idea is that by using these exercises you enter a state of passive concentration almost like meditation, and in this autogenic state the body can restore and regenerate itself. "Autogenics worked very quickly for me - after about two weeks my low level migraine disappeared and I stopped waking in the night with pain. Now I feel I have a toolbox I can dip into to deal with my stress rather than simply be pulled around by it." Cognitive therapy Tammie Bowquett, 26, student, Dorchester Tammie is completing a degree in television production. She had a breakdown at the start of her second year's study. Cognitive therapy enabled her to get back to her studies and fulfil her lifetime's ambition. "I've been treated for depression with medication and psychotherapy on and off since I was 12. Two years ago I had a breakdown pretty much out of the blue. Three weeks before term was due to start, I began to get depressed and have panic attacks. My GP was fantastic and prescribed me anti-depressants and tranquillisers to help with the anxiety, because I desperately wanted to carry on with the course, but I just couldn't manage it. My GP suggested cognitive therapy which is based on the idea that how you think largely determines the way you feel. I had to wait about two months for an appointment and I spent the time at home in a sleeping bag, crying. "I had about two months of weekly sessions. The therapy taught me to examine the evidence behind my negative thoughts and gave me the tools to prevent these thought processes escalating out of control. If my first thought in the morning was: 'I can't do this', I could then say to myself, 'What's the evidence I can't do it? I've done it before.' Everytime I had a horrible feeling and my thoughts began to run away with me, I could use the therapy to help me rationalise my fears and not let them overwhelm me. I was able to return to university and complete my degree. The therapy equipped me to manage the anxiety for myself which is what I wanted." Neuro-linguistics Lisa Wake, 36, NLP practitioner, North Yorkshire Lisa is a former practice nurse with a diploma in asthma management. She began learning neuro-linguistic programming (NLP) for health problems six years ago. Now a master practitioner of NLP, she helps train health professionals, and has recently used NLP techniques to free herself from the asthma she's had all her life. "NLP teaches different techniques to establish rapport with others, identify personal goals, change unhelpful beliefs and achieve excellence. A core belief is that our thoughts and physiology are intimately connected. I think I always knew that my asthma might have a psychological root cause, but I only began to explore it when I discovered an NLP technique called communicating with your symptoms, developed by an American practitioner Robert Dilts. The message from my asthma symptoms was that I wasn't taking enough care of myself. I had already successfully used NLP for dealing with simpler health problems such as back pain and PMT, and towards the end of last year, I felt confident enough to try applying it to my asthma. "At the time I was using Becotide, a steroid preventer twice a day and a Ventolin inhaler to relieve my asthma attacks whenever I needed it. The crunch came one day when I was in the gym, and felt the usual exercise-induced asthma attack coming on. I decided not to reach for my inhaler but to try instead talking to my body's white cells to shift the congestion I felt in my bronchial tubes. I imagined a red, inflamed blockage and there and then in my head I played some marching music and imagined the white cells marching towards the blockage and eating away at it. After a few minutes I was able to cough up the blockage of sputum that was there. I felt tremendously excited that I had been able to manage my asthma in this way. I decided to stop using my inhaler and instead to go into the mind and body connection to cope with my asthma attacks. I also decided to step down on my steroid medication and I had the medical background to know how to do it safely. "I've been free of medication for five months. I now no longer have asthma, but most surprisingly neither do my daughters aged 12 and 10. Both have been asthmatic since they were small and Rebecca my elder daughter has been quite ill with it in the past. She was using both preventer and reliever medicines and now uses neither, although she still carries her preventer with her. She simply came to me one day and said, 'Mum, I don't seem to have asthma any more.' The fact that I no longer have asthma appears to have had a knock on effect on them. I now do 40 minutes of aerobic exercise two or three times a week without even thinking about asthma." Fact file • Autogenic info: send an sae to British Autogenic Training Society, Royal London Homeopathic Hospital, Great Ormond Street, London WC1N 3HR. • Cognitive info: send £2 + A5 sae to British Association for Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, PO Box 9, Accrington BB5 2GP. • Neuro-linguistics info: The Association for Neuro-Linguistic Programming. PO Box 78, Stourbridge, DY8 4ZJ. Tel 01384-443935.