I stopped counting the Nato days some time ago, but I do remember, when we betted about the date of the end of the war, I blurted without any analytical knowledge, being a political idiot: June 2. Two days ago we sat listening to Radio Free Europe, without electricity, without water, with bored children sulking or quarreling at our backs. And that was peace, exactly as we expected it. And much more of that peace will come soon: winter without heat, no safe food, no baked bread, no pensions, no jobs ... Was all this really necessary? Maybe for some people it was, but not for most Serbians - today bedridden, frightened, impoverished, and faithless, if not dead. Last night was the second time since March 24, when the bombing began, that the air raid siren didn't go. We waited for it until dawn and then we went to bed waiting for the all-clear to be sounded, like trained dogs. I cry and cry. I think of these last days when more soldiers will die, and civilians, because the politicians need more time for fine tuning. I count in my head those sons of friends who have survived. I heard Serbs will have to clean the mine fields: our sons, not the paramilitary troops which planted them. I heard Serbs will have to pay for the bombs dropped on them. A ridiculous parallel: as Jews paid for the gas in the gas chambers. We are finishing by shooting a film based on the diaries I have been keeping since the war began. "Shoot the euphoria on the streets of Belgrade," our German friends ask us. But there is no euphoria, just depression. The ritual patriotic concert at midday at the Republic Square attracted less than 20 people, and of those at least half were homeless people who live in the square. The alarm went twice during the day, with terrifying explosions booming in the outskirts of Belgrade. Amid the terror, my daughter received her exam results. Her grades were good, even though she hasn't been to school during these Nato days. The foreigners wanted us to overthrow our elected president whom they have indicted. The government wanted us to defeat Nato. And between these two we stood as hostages, idiots. The most we managed, patriots or traitors both, was to survive. "I am so happy I will embrace once again my Albanian friend," my best friend said. My father was more confused. "Is this a capitulation?" he keeps asking, imbuing the word "capitulation" with the same emotion that "bankrupt" used to have. I tell him people don't commit suicide for that kind of stuff anymore. My mother is angry too. "Your generation didn't fight for Kosovo, so it has no right to give it away." My friend's father has grown crazy with anxiety. I can't see how it will ever be the same again. Our children have aged five years in two months and have spiritually abandoned us: the gap is not generational, it is existential. Like the zoo animals who devoured their young in Belgrade zoo during the bombing, we lost our animal instincts, walking careless of our own safety, risking the lives of our own children. We lost our small talk during nights of fear and darkness. What is left is a shell of what we once used to be. I am angry and depressed, as everyone here is. When the bombs stop we will be able to deal with our material problems. But where shall we find our peace of mind? And who will give us a credible explanation for the bomb which exploded in my yard, killing a 23-year-old gypsy girl as "collateral damage". Jasmina Tesanovic is a Belgrade author and publisher