Leading construction group John Laing yesterday admitted unlawfully discriminating against a man it had intended to appoint its company secretary, after rejecting him when it emerged that he had a history of schizophrenia. In the first case of its kind, the group agreed to pay undisclosed damages to Andrew Watkiss, who has had no mental illness for eight years and holds a senior post with another leading company. Paul Daniels, Mr Watkiss's solicitor, said: "This should open the door for a lot of claims against employers by individuals who have a record of mental health problems." Mr Watkiss, who is assistant company secretary at Unigate, the dairy group, applied for the post at John Laing and was offered the job last January, subject to a medical. During the examination, he acknowledged that he had been diagnosed with schizophrenia in 1980 and had suffered three breakdowns between then and 1991. Although he had since been perfectly able to manage the condition with medication, the company withdrew the job offer on "medical" grounds that the post would be too stressful for him. Mr Watkiss challenged the decision under the disability discrimination act, which had not previously been used successfully against recruitment prejudice on mental health grounds. John Laing has now settled the case, with its admission of culpability written into the employment tribunal record. The financial terms of the settlement are being kept confidential but compensation is likely to be substantial as it includes both injury to feelings and future loss of earnings for Mr Watkiss, 46. He said yesterday that John Laing's attitude had been in marked contrast to that of Unigate, which had taken him on within a year of his last admission to hospital. Since then, he had experienced no mental illness. "John Laing sent out a very negative message, so I hope this outcome will make employers more aware and open to people with this sort of mental health problem," said Mr Watkiss, who lives in London and is a fellow of the Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators. Mr Daniels, of the London law firm Russell Jones &amp; Walker, said that the case did not set a legal precedent but still sent a clear warning to employers. "Many employers won't touch people with a bargepole if there is any mention of mental health problems. Sometimes that's fair enough, where people are still ill, but the essential thing is that people have to be treated on their merits and not on the basis of stereotypical views." The mental health charity Mind said that about 70% of people with mental health problems were deterred from applying for jobs because they feared unfair treatment. Simon Foster, Mind's principal solicitor, said: "People with mental health problems can now be confident that they have a fair chance to find work without discrimination."