National health services became available online for the first time Britain today after Tony Blair unveiled the government's flagship NHS Direct online service, aimed at reducing the strain on hard-pressed health professionals. "NHS Direct can become a symbol of both modern health care and fair health care," said the prime minister, launching the expansion of the service on a visit to Bootle Strand shopping centre in Merseyside. The online operation, which cost £750,000 to set up, will provide people of up-to-date information on 200 specific diseases and their treatment. Offering a questionnaire for people to determine whether patients need to see a doctor, it also publishes information about how best to use NHS services. Health secretary Alan Milburn said it would "complement, not compete with" doctors' surgeries and hospitals and help relieve the pressure on overloaded surgeries and hospitals, by dealing with simple complaints about minor ailments. "Nowadays what people want is to be able to spot health problems and, where it is safe to do so, they want to be able to deal with those problems themselves," Mr Milburn said. The health secretary emphasised that this was just the first step in creating a "21st century" NHS service available in peoples' own living rooms and in future would be "extended into a fully interactive service". It is planned that online patients will soon be able to join online discussion groups about health problems, and have on-line "video" consultations. Internet access points in pharmacies and supermarkets across the country will be established by next year. The government also announced the expansion of the 24-hour NHS Direct telephone helpline, which now covers 65% of the country's population. It has received almost 800,000 calls since its launch last April and currently costs £70 million a year to run. Doctors sounded a note of caution. "We will not know how effective NHS Direct is until it has been evaluated to see whether it is helping manage demand, is enabling people to use the NHS more appropriately, is leading to improved outcomes and is good value for money," said the British Medical Association in a statement. • The extension of the telephone helpline now means that the following areas are covered by NHS Direct: • The West Country • Hampshire • Kent, Surrey and Sussex • Thames Valley and Northamptonshire • West London • South London • South West London • Essex • Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire • West Midlands • East Midlands • South Yorkshire • West Yorkshire • Hull and East Yorkshire • Manchester • Lancashire • North East