Family doctors are spending almost a third of their working time on patients' mental health problems, according to a survey to be published today. More people are going to their GP for treatment for anxiety and depression, the research suggests. But doctors may be ill equipped - and even reluctant - to help. About a quarter of GPs wanted to reduce the time they spent on mental health, the survey found. Almost a third of these said they had no strong interest in the area. The findings raise serious concerns about how the NHS will cope with the rising incidence of mental health problems. Increasingly stressful lifestyles, growing numbers of confused elderly people and the receding stigma of mental illness are all adding to GPs' workloads. "If you are a patient with a mental problem, and you are registered with one of the GPs who told us they have no strong interest in mental illness, you could be in some difficulties," said Julia Cumberlege, a former Conservative health minister, who worked on the survey of 325 GPs. The research, the first of its kind, was commissioned by the Mental After Care Association, a charity. The GPs spent on average 30% of their working time, or 1.5 days a week, on mental health problems. By far the greatest demand involved anxiety and depression, accounting for 15% of the typical GP's time, with psychosomatic problems - those of a physical ailment brought on by a mental condition - adding 5% and elderly mentally illness 3%. In urban areas, drug and al cohol dependency was an emerging demand, found to be causing "increasing dissatisfaction" among many of the doctors affected, the survey report said. Although 42% of GPs were content with the time they spent on mental health, 34% said that they would like to devote more time to it and 24% said that they would like to devote less. Of those wishing to do less, almost all were concerned at the knock-on effect on time available for physical illnesses, while 30% said that they had no strong interest and 32% doubted the adequacy of their skills and training. Fewer than one in seven had worked in mental health in a hospital setting in the past five years. Lady Cumberlege, who chaired a national review of community nursing and was a member of the NHS policy board before becoming a minister, said that the findings showed that there was a need for specialisation in mental health care. Within larger GP practices, partners interested in doing more should take cases from those wishing to do less. Single-doctor practices could consider getting together to achieve the same result. "Doctors do have to be honest about it, but there is no escaping the fact that mental health work is increasing and it's unfair to expect every GP to be an expert in everything," said Lady Cumberlege, who now works with a Manchester-based consultancy, MJM Healthcare Solutions. • Doctors need a pay rise of at least 5% simply to maintain their position relative to comparable groups, the British Medical Association said yesterday in evidence to the profession's pay review body.