Modern medicine has moved not only beyond the hopes of doctors of the last century, but way beyond anything they could have imagined. Now, the creation of babies in test tubes and computer-guided, keyhole surgery are routine. Even 20th-century flights of fancy, such as the Star Trek-style, hand-held diagnostic machine, which detects illness without touching the body, are now within reach. With this incredible progress has come a revolution in expectations. At the end of the last century, people anticipated a shortish life in which illness led to pain and suffering, and many children did not survive to adulthood. Now, maternal and perinatal mortality are tiny in the UK, we expect to see out at least our threescore and ten - and if we do not get better in the hands of the doctor, we sue. We have come so far, so fast, thanks to a stream of microbiological and technological breakthroughs, together with a focus on public health and social welfare. The launch of the National Health Service in this country in 1949, following two world wars that concentrated minds on our general human frailty, meant health - and glasses and dentistry - for all the population, not just the rich. Immunisation has been one of the greatest successes of the century. The recent backlash against the MMR (measles, mumps, rubella) jabs is a product partly of the widespread dissemination of information today, where patients will go to the doctor armed with an internet printout and knowing more about the condition than the doctor does. But it is also born of complacency, in a society where childhood deaths are relatively uncommon. Louis Pasteur died in 1896, but his research into the micro-organisms responsible for disease was refined by scientists at the Pasteur Institute. The first tuberculosis vaccine from live, attenuated bacillus, called the BCG (Bacilli Calmette Guerin, after the two French scientists responsible), was used on calves, but not on humans until 1924. War proved immunisation beyond doubt. Tetanus and typhoid vaccinations during the first world war slashed the death toll among troops. The same war inspired Alexander Fleming's work on wounds and resistance to infection. This led to the discovery of penicillin, the most exciting medical event this century, in August 1928. Penicillin was used with extraordinary effectiveness against bacterial diseases such as meningitis, diphtheria, anthrax, tetanus and syphilis. Pneumonia once killed one-third of those who contracted it. With penicillin, the death-rate fell to 6%. Between 1952 and 1969, maternal mortality fell from 67 to 19 per thousand, partly due to better care under the NHS, but also thanks to antibiotics. Not long ago, it was assumed we were on the way to eliminating infectious diseases. The World Health Organisation has declared smallpox to have been eradicated - the last death was 22 years ago. But the end of the century has seen the emergence of new strains of TB, malaria and other diseases, as well as hospital superbugs that are resistant to the now massively overused antibiotics. And the most alarming new disease is Aids, a viral infection that is held in check with expensive drugs in the west, but for which there is no cure. Much ill-health is "self-inflicted" by 20th-century lifestyles - tobacco kills 30 million a year, and the toll is rising sharply, while heart disease from junk food, smoking and lack of exercise is spreading around the globe. Cancer is often blamed on our damaged environment, but its incidence is soaring at least in part because we are living much longer. Gene therapy and designed drugs, tailored for each individual, may offer new hope in the next century. In 1962, Malcolm Muggeridge called this century "the age of pills". From aspirin to Prozac, we have been seduced by hopes of a wonderdrug - to make us whole, healthy, happy, awake or asleep at our convenience. But, in the early 60s, Thalidomide changed the blithe acceptance that drugs always did you good. This anti-nausea drug, used by pregnant women, led to the birth of more than 5,000 deformed babies, and stringent rules governing the testing of drugs were introduced. With advances in anaesthesia and drug treatment, new operations were attempted. In December 1967, Professor Christiaan Barnard carried out the first heart transplant. The recipient survived for 18 days. In Britain, there are now around 400 such operations annually, and the world's first arm transplant took place last year. Animal-to-human organ transplants are being researched, but may be overtaken by developments in human tissue-growing and cloning. Improved education has led to the questioning of the belief that doctors know best. In Britain, Grantly Dick-Read, and, later, Benjamin Spock in the US, led a revolution against medical intervention in childbirth, encouraging women to trust themselves, during labour and later, in the early years of child-rearing. The closing years of the century have seen the revival of herbal and homeopathic cures, and, in some quarters, suspicion of modern medicine. There is a feeling that it is time to consolidate and assess the value of all we have achieved.