Rosemary and I are in desperate need of exercise but somehow can't be bothered. We hardly move at all. Even our dog walks are growing shorter, slower and more tragic, with my poor old dog dragging along behind, and we are growing more lumpy by the day. But exercise is so dull and such a fag, we feel: getting to the gym/pool/class, pulling your clothes on and off, getting wet, getting dry. Meanwhile, everyone else is at it. Olivia walks miles to work, Olga cycles diagonally across London to Yoga and Angela up the road has a personal trainer. This seems perfect. Someone comes to your house and makes you do it. The trainer is young, slim and very strict, but sadly too expensive for Rosemary and me, so we just sit moaning and wondering what to do. If only we could be like Olivia, determined to get into shape. Before she started long-distance walking she checked her body out. She lay on her back and studied all of it with a mirror. It wasn't too bad, except her face hung down over her ears. If she wants to look appealing while lying down she has to turn her neck in an odd sort of sideways position. What a brave woman. I have never been keen on studying my body closely with a mirror. I had a quick glance half a century ago, when staring at oneself was suddenly popular, but it gave me a bit of a fright. I cried in the bathroom for hours and a couple of decades passed before I looked again. Now that the ageing process is really hotting up I hardly dare look at all. Flesh is pulping over the edges of my shoes, straps and elastics, moles mushrooming up in new and larger clusters and a pinafore of fat draped over my stomach, so I now make sure my whole body is hidden from view. Rosemary pretends she hasn't got one at all. "It's all narcissism," says she strictly, "being preoccupied with one's looks." Then she saw herself on video, sideways-on. Until then she had thought her cream linen skirt rather chic. So we are still searching for a tolerable exercise. I fancy that new Yoga which is fast and noisy. "You're joking!" says Olga. "You need to be fit for that." Back to square one.