• This was an interesting read to find on my breakfast table - health analysis by a health specialist who seems to have misunderstood the function of the NHS (Fit to spend, December 20). Whatever the NHS was set up to do, its function 50 years later is not to improve the health of the nation, but to keep spending on health under control. Spending on health is not the only input into the production of better health. Better health results from better housing; better incomes; and better nutrition, especially when a child. Most of the "health spending" on any individual goes on the last few weeks of their life and so can't really affect the statistics. The real function of the NHS is to remove the fear of illness so that the well can get on with the job of being a healthy adult, just like having a page full of 24-hour plumbers in the telephone directory makes me feel better despite the fact that my central heating is fine. Another way of looking at the NHS is this - health is a giant industry. If the UK has a system of health care that severely restricts spending in this industry how will we participate? You and I may not be proud of our arms exports, but there can be no question that the way defence has been funded here over the years has nurtured a very big export earner. Sadly, the way the NHS is so reluctant to invest in capital equipment and so keen on putting up with the cheapest (sorry, cost-effective) has meant that we import the costly machines and rely instead on the export of destructive weapons to top up our balance of payments. The NHS is not a charity looking after the poor and sick, but a giant and underperforming sector of the economy. Richard Gregson (Consultant eye surgeon) Richard.Gregson@btinernet.com • Urban parks were created under public health acts and so successful as to be copied worldwide. Their present condition shames the institutions of local and national government who preside over their neglect. Here is a chance for ministers to make a real difference to health and at a fraction of the cost of expensive drug treatments on the NHS. Alan Barber Bristol Alan_Barber@compuserve.com