So what looked like a bright new dawn for Hearts ended with clouds of depression settling again over Tynecastle. Two goals before half-time - their first in the League in more than nine-and-a-half hours of football - should have set them up for a victory that might have lifted many of the fears and phobias which have seen them plunge to the bottom of the League. Instead, they squandered the initiative - and their chance of ending a run of 12 league games without a win - in the second half to a never-say-die Kilmarnock side. Hearts have only themselves to blame. They had enough gilt-edged chances between Gary McSwegan's first-half goals to put the result beyond doubt, when Adam (twice) and McSwegan himself all scorned glorious opportunities. For much of the first half, Hearts' new signing from Celtic, Darren Jackson, had looked to have the skill and the influence to change the gloomy picture, but in the end he too seemed to be caught up in the crisis of confidence that has troubled Hearts. Now, while doubts grow about their ability to survive in the Premier League, Kilmarnock have confirmed their status as the only side in the country capable of challenging Rangers and Celtic. The success of this spectacular salvage job owes much to their veteran striker Ally McCoist, introduced as a late substitute, who slid in to ensure that a shot from Gary Holt that had beaten goalkeeper Rousset finished in the back of the net. McCoist therefore stole the thunder yet again from McSwegan who had served so long as his understudy at Ibrox. Yet it could and should have been a very different story if Hearts had been able to apply the killer touch in that first half when they had so much of the attacking play. McSwegan had set the stage for likely victory with his first goal for the club on 16 minutes, when he took full advantage of a perfectly weighted through-pass from Jackson. Then came all those misses which were to prove to costly. But there was no hint that Hearts would squander points when, two minutes from the interval, McSwegan claimed his second with a powerful shot after Adam had set him up with a clever back heel. When Hearts were in their pomp last season, that two-goal cushion would have been enough to ensure victory, but in the second half their confidence and their concentration wavered, allowing Killie's outstanding midfield general Ian Durrant to bring his side right back into the reckoning. First, on 73 minutes, he helped to set up the substitute Hendry to pull one back with a low shot from the edge of the box which seemed to catch Rousset slow off his mark. Then, on 77 minutes, McCoist levelled it.