Screaming Lord Sutch hanged himself after a long battle against depression which he hid behind his madcap public facade as leader of the Monster Raving Loony Party, a coroner said yesterday. Recording a verdict of suicide, William Dolman, the Hornsey coroner, described the maverick politician and rock musician as "a comedian with tragedy in his heart". He added: "The public saw the public face, a cheery outgoing character, yet in the privacy of his room, his true character, his true sadness, appeared." The 45-minute reconvened hearing provided an insight into the reality of life for Sutch, 58, who was found hanging at his late mother's home in Harrow, north-west London, on June 16 by his fiancee Yvonne Elwood. Beneath the trademark wackiness during a 35-year career in politics, which made him Britain's longest serving party leader, Sutch, who changed his name from David Sutch by deed poll in the 1960s, was haunted by manic depression. Ms Elwood told the coroner that her fiance had been on medication for many years for his illness. "It would affect him physically and he just couldn't cope, he had to cancel appointments and nothing would make him happy." He was living in the dilapidated house of his late mother, Nancy, and when Ms Elwood wanted a bath she had to go back home to Reading because of the lack of facilities. The coroner also heard evidence from Cynthia Payne, who used to run a brothel and is now an after-dinner speaker. Sutch had lived at Ms Payne's home for several years after they met while campaigning for the 1988 Kensington byelection. "He was like a little boy, he always called me mumsy," she said. "He never slept properly. He used to get up at three in the morning and go down to the kitchen and drink tea or cocoa." The death of Sutch's mother in 1997 had a severe effect on his health, she said. Ten days before Sutch's death, a promoter had contacted him to make sure he would attend a gig. Sutch, according to Ms Payne, had told him: "Don't worry about that, I shall be on the front pages of the newspapers next week." The inquest heard that the weekend before his death, during a trip to Wales with Ms Elwood, he had seemed happier. He had discussed forthcoming concerts in Belgium and Las Vegas. Ms Elwood found him at his house, after clambering over filing cabinets in the hallway. He had hanged himself with a multi-coloured skipping rope. He left two notes and, on a calendar, had also written a daily commentary on his state of mind. The last entry, for June 15, read "depression depression depression is too much". The coroner said: "His life was a tragic comedy which came to a sudden end, [which] he obviously planned. The entertainment and fun he brought many, in what one might call the sometimes unsavoury world of politics, I hope will be remembered longer than the events of this June." Useful site Official Monster Raving Loony Party website