Jack Straw's proposals for locking up people with severe personality disorders are designed to close a blatantly ridiculous legislative loophole. The current Mental Health Act says that potentially dangerous people can only be put away if their condition is treatable. Most doctors believe that personality disorders cannot be treated. So mentally disordered and dangerous people can only be locked up if they have committed an offence. And even then they must be released once they have completed their sentence, even if they remain a danger to society, and to themselves. This is plainly a nonsense. According to the best available estimates, there are more than 2000 sufferers from personality disorder who are receiving no kind of treatment for their condition. Most are convicted prisoners, which is a scandal in itself. Several hundred are in hospital, because they suffer from an additional and treatable mental illness. Those targeted by the Home Secretary's proposals are the 200 or so so-called "time bombs" living in the community, without treatment or supervision. They could include men like Michael Stone, the psychopathic killer of Megan and Lin Russell, who had pleaded in vain with doctors to lock him up. The government has a duty to prevent such horrors. But its obligation to protect the public is coupled with a wider responsibility to safeguard the rights of all citizens, however afflicted they may be. The latest proposals, which effectively allow for inadequate people to be shut away indefinately, are alarming for not only for civil rights activists, but for anyone concerned about individual liberties. There must be a small insistent tick of doubt that the proposed measures are designed less to protect society, than to bolster the government's law-and-order credentials. Though the numbers involved may be tiny, the issues are huge. Straw said this morning there would be tough legal and clinical procedures for determining whether people with personality disorders should be detained. There would also be "regular and frequent" reviews. That sort of soothing babble does not come close to quelling the queasy feeling that there is potentially sinister work afoot. The Home Secretary gives the game away when he accuses the psychiatric profession of going "backwards not forwards" in reducing the number of conditions deemed to be treatable. And what, pray, are Jack Straw's qualifications for telling us what is right or wrong in the present state of psychiatric medicine? The uncertainties of the medics may be politically inconvenient, but they reflect a genuinely grey area of medical wisdom. The whole issue is fraught with perilously vague definitions. Doctors are divided about what personality disorder is, and whether it is treatable. Politicians use cheap slogans about 'care in the community' when they mean 'saving money'. Nobody can pretend to know what exactly is meant by 'dangerous'. Only one thing is clear: the power to lock people up is by its nature authoritarian, and even the distant risk of abuse should put us all on our guard. Useful links: Home Office Mind Sainsbury Centre: research on mental health issues The royal Kennedys The presumed death of John F Kennedy Junior is a human tragedy which grips us all. As we ogle from the outside the grief of this most afflicted of families, there is inevitably a grisly tendency to zero in on the next generation and examine their chances of extirpating the family jinx - or falling victim to it. We are accustomed of thinking of the Kennedys as America's royals; an aberration in the body politic. Yet there is nothing surprising or even unusual about their dynastic achievements and ambitions. America is shot through with dynasticism, and there is a strongly monarchical streak in the republic's highest political institutions. The President, most obviously, is not just an elected politician. He is the commander-in-chief and head of state, who could never be subjected to, say, the vulgar rough and tumble of a Prime Minister's question time. The fascination of the Kennedys is that for 70 years or more they have used politics as a means to a much loftier end: to rule, rather than merely govern. Their essentially patrician obsession is unlikely to perish, whatever the human cost. Useful link: Links, reports and background: more about the Kennedy