Reactions to the government's green paper on mental health (Leader, November 17) inevitably focus on the proposal to introduce compulsory treatment orders (CTOs) for the small but significant number of patients suffering from a severe mental disorder who are unable or unwilling to comply with treatment in the community. Government figures show that of the 1,000 suicides and 40 homicides each year by people in contact with services, some 30% in both categories were non-compliant with treatment in the month before. The Zito Trust does not believe that CTOs are proposed to address this problem alone. We believe that for those patients who would in the past have been in hospital, CTOs are the humane way to ensure that once the tea and sympathy approach has broken down, modern and effective treatments are made available to those at risk to themselves or others, before they deteriorate to such an extent that they become sectionable under current arrangements. At the moment, faced with dogged non-compliance, clinicians have no alternative but to walk away, leaving patients to fend for themselves. Is it any surprise so many become "lost to the services"? Are those organisations which represent users of services comfortable with this? You report "widespread opposition" among mental health groups to the government's proposals for CTOs and yet they have been overwhelmingly endorsed by the government's advisory body and the National Confidential Inquiry, and by surveys of professionals, carers and users of services published earlier this year by the Mental After Care Association and the National Schizophrenia Fellowship, among others. It is difficult to know where these organisations now stand, as they are presumably committed to representing the views of their membership. They seem to be at risk of saying yes to CTOs with one voice, and no with another. Michael Howlett Director, Zito Trust • The government's proposals for the reform of the mental health act are long overdue. But the government is missing the opportunity of a generation by placing the focus of attention on compulsory treatment rather than the chance to give the people most affected rights to decent care and treatment. The green paper includes references to advance agreements, rights to advocacy and a second opinion, which are all welcome. Yet once again the agenda seems to be set by compulsion for the few rather than care for the many, compulsion which is all too often the cheap and easy resort of services, not the last resort which is where it belongs. This week we handed in a petition to the department of health of 20,000 service users, carers and concerned professionals calling for rights to care and treatment. It is not too late to hear their voice. Cliff Prior National Schizophrenia Fellowship Karen Campbell Manic Depression Fellowship Gil Hitchon Mental After Care Association • Most people would recognise closure of the asylums in favour of new, smaller hospitals as a positive move which made services more responsive to communities and individuals. The government now seems intent on reversing this by opening hundreds of new asylums - in peoples' homes. Peter Carter London pete.carter@virgin.net • On Page 2: you report that 80 former psychiatric patients are to sue the NHS after being prescribed LSD without their consent (Patients sue over LSD treatment side effects). Page 12: Mentally ill face enforced treatment. Roy Benford Fulmer, Bucks