The family doctor is often seen as the first port of call for anyone with mental health problems. Yet for some patients, the GP is as likely to show them the door as to offer practical help and sympathy. There are no hard facts and figures. Psychiatrists from south London and Maudsley Hospital met a wall of silence when they recently attempted to find out whether people with mental health problems were commonly struck off doctors' lists. They launched their study after realising that 30% of their own patients had been struck off at some time. Two local London health authorities refused to provide them with any details. Nobody knows the extent of the problem because GPs, as independent contractors, can legally remove anyone from their registers without explanation or scrutiny. The BMA advises GPs to deregister patients only when the relationship has "irretrievably broken down". It should not be because of clinical conditions and says they should normally give a reason. Yet there is clear evidence from patient watchdogs around the country that GPs do deregister patients simply because they have psychiatric problems. Cases that have emerged include a woman with agoraphobia, another woman with a compulsion to self-harm who was struck off for making too many emergency calls, and an elderly woman with Alzheimer's disease. One woman from Stockport said she had difficulty registering with a GP nine years ago when she moved house while pregnant because a midwife had scrawled "hypomania" (mild mental illness) across her ante-natal notes. She only found a GP after her baby's birth. The Association of Community Health Councils for England and Wales (ACHCEW) often encounters cases where mentally ill patients are struck off. "Most CHCs will tell you removal from GPs' lists is a recur ring problem for people with mental health problems," says policy officer Gary Fereday. For some this becomes a merry-go-round where they are repeatedly allocated a new doctor by their health authority. Local agreements usually state GPs should keep any one patient for a minimum of three or six months. Says Fereday: "There are people around the country who have almost never had a relationship with a GP. It is the norm to find themselves shunted around." The association is leading calls for a change to the law obliging GPs to give patients explanations when they are struck off and to provide an appeal system. Figures published by the House of Commons public administration committee, this year, reveal deregistrations have risen in England and Wales from 70,000 to 82,000 between 1993-94 and 1995-96, although this includes people who have moved without alerting their GP. Even more alarming is the fact that 14% had been struck off more than once and some as many as 23 times. Only 1% involved GPs threatened with violence. South Tyneside CHC has taken up the cause of three patients with psychiatric problems who were removed from their doctors' registers. One woman, with mild mental health problems and agoraphobia, was struck off by numerous GPs because she kept telephoning their surgeries, says chief officer Ian Webb. Eventually she was so afraid of being struck off she would not contact any doctor, despite physical symptoms including swollen legs. The CHC badgered one GP to take her on for two years but twice had to insist the doctor make a home visit. Eventually, the woman died of a heart condition. Although the CHC does not blame her death on neglect, Webb believes if she had been more articulate she might have had better care. The CHC has pursued two other cases where women with mental health problems have been struck off, including an elderly woman deregistered when Alzheimer's disease was diagnosed. Webb accepts GPs have a right to refuse treatment to people who are violent or abusive, but says: "When they are in the business of providing a mental health service it seems crazy they are striking people off." In Wales, the user and survivor network has also helped patients struck off GPs' lists to find more sympathetic doctors. One woman was deregistered after disagreeing over the drugs she was prescribed while another was struck off because she telephoned too often after harming herself, says the network's Steve Craine. The good practice campaign reports people struck off for reasons as diverse as wanting a home birth or complaining about a tree cut down in the surgery grounds. Cam paign founder Moi Ali says: "It is not uncommon for people to be struck off because they have mental health problems." Judi Clements, chief executive of mental health charity Mind, says people with mental health problems are sometimes told by GPs they are taking up too much time and should not return. "We think it is certainly something that should be looked at and there should be ways of monitoring it." • A longer version of this article appears tomorrow in OpenMind, the mental health magazine published by Mind (tel: 0181-221 9661 for subscriptions). For help with mental health problems, contact Mindinfoline on 0345 660 163.