If Alan Milburn really wants to reduce the deaths from heart disease and cancer (Labour rethinks NHS pledge, October 18), he should start by tackling their origins. He will learn far more from public health specialists and those who fight the causes of ill-health, especially poverty and the tobacco industry, than by talking to cardiac surgeons. Their contribution, necessary though it is, has a much smaller impact than prevention. If the government told the NHS to focus on health rather than illness, waiting lists would get shorter by themselves. Donald Reid Joint chief executive, UK Public Health Association Donald.Reid@hea.org.uk • While I am very glad to read that the government is going to find extra NHS money for people suffering from heart disease and cancer, I would like to know when they are going to find extra money for those suffering from the many types of arthritis. Many of us are in pain for many, many years, with sleepless nights and painful days. Our doctors tell us there is very little they can do to help us as money is not available for the research needed. If the government is not interested in the pain we suffer, can they be influenced by the number of hours lost at work by arthritic sufferers. Surely it's time that money was found to research a cure for these complaints, which affect millions of people. Patricia Pique Coulsdon, Surrey • Won't the reprieve for tobacco advertising hinder the government's new drive against cancer? Or am I being too joined-up? Philip Insall Bristol p.install@virgin.net • If Alan Milburn is serious about a 24-hour NHS he will have to expand the numbers of not only doctors and nurses but laboratory staff, radiographers, receptionists and porters (NHS changes to speed up, says Milburn, October 14). At present only an "emergency" backbone of staff remain in the hospital between 5pm and 9am to provide basic services. There simply isn't the staff or facilities provided at night in an A &amp; E department for people to use it as a drop-in clinic for non-emergency problems. However, by persistently giving the public the message that it is their right to demand immediate attention 24 hours a day, Mr Milburn is increasing the pressure on an already over-stretched service as the public see walk-in clinics and A &amp; E as much the same thing. His statement is totally at odds with the latest government offer for out-of-hours pay for junior doctors which still does not offer even a full hourly rate for overtime hours worked, let alone a percentage increase to compensate for antisocial hours, long shifts and disruption to sleep pattern and family life. Doctors are not "conservative" or "living in the past" but realistic that the NHS clearly does not have the money or willing to pay adequately for overtime and the increased numbers of personnel necessary to provide a 24-hour service. Dr Emily Gwinnell Accident &amp; Emergency department, Dryburn Hospital Durham