Poverty researchers will deliver an attack today on what they portray as the government's failure to tackle the biggest health gap between north and south, and rich and poor, since records began. The comments are based on a study published 24 hours after ministers chose to promote their welfare reforms by highlighting punitive measures against fathers who fail to pay child maintenance and offenders who breach community service orders. The researchers are accusing the government of talking a good fight against poverty and inequality, but doing little in practice. Daniel Dorling, co-author of the study, said: "Despite pledging to reduce poverty, the current Labour administration has clearly reneged on both its commitments regarding health made before the election [and] much of what key cabinet members wrote and said in the past." The study has been compiled by researchers at Bristol university who specialise in scrutiny of comparative death rates to demonstrate health inequality. Their latest analysis, The Widening Gap, draws also on other indicators to produce what is claimed to be the most comprehensive work of its kind since the Black report in 1980. That report showed that health inequalities had been widening since the 1950s and urged a programme of urgent measures, including higher welfare benefits, to turn the tide. Today's study says the health gap has gone on widening to the extent that rates of infant mortality - deaths of babies under 12 months of age - are at least twice as high in poor areas such as much of Glasgow and parts of Manchester as in well-off districts in the home counties. During this decade, premature death rates for all children and adults under 65 have soared as much as 2.6 times as fast in areas of Glasgow, Liverpool and Newcastle upon Tyne as in places such as south Suffolk, Buckingham and Wokingham, Berkshire, which has the lowest such death rates in Britain. The worst health areas are said to have 4.2 times as many children living in poverty as the best, 3.6 times as much unemployment and 1.5 times as many GCSE failures. To implement the recommendations of the Black report now would cost about £12.5bn, the study estimates. The sum is roughly what will be generated before the next general election by the windfall tax on privatised utilities and the surplus on the national insurance fund. Unless the government does more, the researchers warn, "hundreds of thousands more will die young during the first few decades of the 21st century, millions will suffer unnecessary illness and disability and tens of millions will be cheated of fair life chances". Ministers will point out that most of the data on which the study is based pre-date the last election. But other research has suggested that, even if all the government's policies work as planned, barely a fifth of the growth of poverty since 1979 will be pegged back by the end of the parliament. The government's main welfare measure for the new legislative session, published yesterday, provides for reform of the child support agency, including tougher sanctions against maintenance defaulters; introduction of the new state second pension in place of the Serps earnings related scheme; and the docking of benefits from unemployed offenders who default on community punishment orders. Alistair Darling, social security secretary, said the measure showed the government's commitment to continue reforming the welfare state and marked "a giant step towards eradicating child poverty".