Rumours that David Montgomery might be negotiating for control of Express Newspapers reminded me of a wonderful anecdote about Nancy Mitford. She was told that her Hitler-loving sister, Unity, full of remorse for the way the Germans were treating the Jews, had decided to go to the east end to see if she could help the Jewish residents there. Nancy exclaimed: "Oh no, havent the poor dears suffered enough?" One is inclined to think that the staff of the Express titles, having had a string of dismal owners in the past 30 years, have genuinely suffered enough. What can Monty, the cost-cutting hero of corporate capital, do to them that hasn't been done already? Indeed, the sword of United News &amp; Medias current chief executive, Clive Hollick, is still wet with blood so its difficult to see why anyone should believe the gossip. But, as with all such tittle-tattle, there are facts which do suggest there is something in the offing. Monty, former chief executive of Mirror Group until he was ousted in January, has been seen in the Express building. Then came a second surprise: Hollick was rather nice about him. Ever since he resigned as a non-executive director from the Mirror Group board in 1993, he has been antipathetic to Monty. Even in a recent interview with the British Journalism Review which was published in Media Guardian, Hollick said he resigned from the Mirror board because of Monty's "unnecessarily brutal" approach. In private, Hollick has been even more forthright about his rival's shortcomings. Suddenly, though, Hollick has let it be known to senior Express staff that "David was a good chief executive". That was more than enough to start the chatterers at Ludgate House where bad news has become the norm. Someone pointed out that Mirror editor, Piers Morgan, who has praised Monty in print of late, had sent a bizarre fax to the Express's gossip columnist on Wednesday saying: "Dear Brutus, I am so going to enjoy firing you one day. Love Piers." So, it was said, perhaps Monty and Piers are in cahoots? That, at least, is far-fetched. Morgan, stung by Brutus, just hopes one day to be in a position to fire him. By Friday, there were other fanciful scenarios linked to the fate of Mirror Group, which is the subject of takeover bids from two regionals groups, Trinity International and Regional Independent Media (RIM), now being investigated by the Competition Commission. It was suggested that the Express groups Tory chairman, Lord Stevens, who intensely dislikes the titles having swung in favour of Labour, is hopeful of RIM losing out on the Mirror and turning its attentions instead to the Express titles. Why? Because the RIM chairman is none other than the former Conservative minister, and now shadow home affairs minister, Sir Norman Fowler. Even more extraordinary have been hints of a formal link between the Express and the Mirror. Meanwhile, the Express group is denying that it's up for sale. It knows nothing about buyers being sought in the United States, such as Gannett, and in Europe, such as Amsterdam's Der Telegraph. Whatever the truth, all of this will surely demoralise the Express staff, including editor Rosie Boycott who told me unequivocally last week: "Clive is totally committed to this paper." But she did add: "Maybe there are other people on the board who only think of money who have different ideas." We shall see.