Mo Mowlam is expected to move from the Northern Ireland office to fill the vacancy of health secretary created by Frank Dobson's bid to be elected as mayor of London, as Tony Blair resumes his cabinet reshuffle. After indicating barely a week ago that he hoped to stay on at health until after Labour's internal six-week campaign for the party's nomination ballot, Mr Dobson yesterday admitted he could not do both jobs at once. "I think it would be an insult to people working in the health service to have a part-time health secretary," he conceded. Signs last night were that Jack Cunningham, currently the cabinet office "enforcer", is to succeed the new Nato secretary general, George Robertson, as defence secretary. Though some well-placed MPs believe he could be dispatched to Belfast instead, Dr Cunningham looked a better bet for defence than the original frontrunner, John Reid. Although Downing Street was saying nothing last night, both Dr Mowlam and Dr Cunningham were known to be in London yesterday, a pointer to important government business. Dr Reid, who is liked by the armed service chiefs and is an articulate defender of the Blairite third way, seems to have been blocked by Lord Robertson, among others. He has also become embroiled in Scotland's lobbygate scandal in which lobbyists, including his own son, are alleged to have claimed ready access to the devolved government. But that could lead Mr Blair to promote him on the grounds that he will not let the media reshuffle his ministers as they so often did John Major's. Such thinking may also point to a return for Peter Mandelson. Alan Milburn, Mr Dobson's former No 2, is also widely tipped to move from the treasury to any of the vacancies, including a return to health. But the popular Ms Mowlam remains the best bet. She was reportedly seen at Downing Street at the weekend. Ulster Unionists have long been keen to see the back of her. They consider her too soft on Sinn Fein and as having sympathies that lean towards nationalism. Their attitude was reinforced by a poll in yesterday's Sunday Times that put her at the top of a list of politicians least trusted by Unionists. A total of 95% of the Ulster Unionists questioned at their party conference on Saturday said they did not trust her, a higher disapproval rating than the Sinn Fein president, Gerry Adams, and the Irish prime minister, Bertie Ahern. There is still a chance that Ms Mowlam could get Dr Cunningham's job. As well as supervising the Whitehall machine, the enforcer must become "minister for the Today programme" - the safe pair of hands to handle all tricky interviews. But many MPs think the high-profile role in health would suit Ms Mowlam's talents better. As usual, much of the intrigue among ministers and officials focused on the fate of Peter Mandelson. The former trade secretary, widely tipped to return to office in July, six months after his Notting Hill mortgage problems forced his resignation, has been notably quiet lately - playing down such talk in private. Some MPs believe that Mr Blair will risk a brief row by reinstating him. But where? Last night's interest pointed to him taking Dr Cunningham's post at the cabinet office, the kind of backroom role at which he excels and from which he sought to escape to a "real" ministry. He is more beholden to Mr Blair's wishes now and the cabinet office was under pressure even before the son of one of the team, Ian McCartney, died of a drug overdose. Mr Blair has two holes he must fill caused by the resignations from defence and health. How he chooses to fill those posts will make the difference between a mini-reshuffle and a medium-sized one. July's changes were extensive at the lower levels of government - the prime minister was criticised for making only one cabinet change. At that time Mr Dobson was still resisting the mayoral challenge and Ms Mowlam wanted to stay with the peace process. Lord Robertson was only gazetted as the new Nato chief four days later. Whether Dr Cunningham goes to Belfast or defence, either move would be seen as a demotion for the great survivor.