News Corporation took its biggest step into the internet yesterday when the media group announced details of a $1bn (£625m) programming and marketing deal with Healtheon/WebMD, an online health-care company. News Corp will pay $100m for a 10.8% stake in the company which connects doctors and consumers with the health-care industry. The me dia group will spend $700m on advertising and marketing to promote Healtheon over the next 10 years. The alliance with a company formed earlier this year from a merger of two online health groups offers further evidence of Rupert Murdoch's determination to expand the media group's online presence. It also points to a trend for traditional offline groups to advance internet strategies by using their strengths to barter for stakes in fast-growing companies. Several offline players in the US have decided to use their marketing and buying power to purchase a stake in internet companies rather than accepting fees or other alliances. Automotive companies such as General Motors have taken the lead but media companies have become more aggressive. News Corp, which owns the Times and the Sun as well as cable channels in the US, re lied on its worldwide marketing power to negotiate terms with Healtheon/WebMD. In the race for brand awareness, online companies are spending huge sums on advertising and marketing campaigns. One investment banker who was not involved in the News Corp deal described it as a win-win situation. "This gives Healtheon huge distribution. But 10% is not an immaterial amount to give away." Peter Chernin, News Corp's president and chief operating officer, said the deal "reversed the established model" for media companies and the internet. Instead of simply sending existing content over the net, "we're using the web as a source for original, unique programming which will be leveraged across all media owned by News Corp". Analysts expect health care to be one of the internet's largest markets. It is also one of several News Corp online priority sectors. More than 100 full-time medical experts at Healtheon/ WebMD will provide health-related news and programmes across the News Corp network. News Corp will be able to syndicate WebMD's daily broadcast as part of a $62.5m, five-year licensing agreement. Healtheon/WebMD will also take a 50% stake in The Health Network, a cable network owned by News Corp.