This month all those grinning, super-confident, airbrushed faces on the covers of women's monthlies look more false than ever. The sector has been struggling for some time, but when the half-yearly ABC figures were released, the bad news was almost universal: only four titles gained sales year-on-year, while many previously healthy glossies, such as Prima and She, suddenly looked sickly. Why the slump? "It's largely down to the sheer range of choice consumers have now," reckons Rita Lewis, publishing director of IPC's fashion and beauty magazines. "And a lot of titles just aren't on top form." Another leading magazine publisher diagnoses "a fractured market caused by numerous titles, too many of them very alike and trying to be all things to all people". Kirsty Hutton, buying director at Total Media, similarly wonders if "the women's monthly sector is becoming a mature, fragmented market, like women's weeklies" and sees the proliferation of cover-mounted freebies as a symptom of its problems. "Haven't publishers learnt anything? They might make sense when you're launching a new product, but when it's already known - why?" Who better to ask, though, than Terry Mansfield, managing director of National Magazines since 1982? In a devastating set of figures, every NatMags monthly except Zest lost sales, with Good Housekeeping's 15.9% drop the worst performance. With all the editors inexplicably mute - possibly deciding which outfit to wear before hurling themselves down on to Carnaby Street from the roof of NatMags' Soho HQ - it fell to the titles' publishers to issue stiff-upper-lipped statements, ranging from catty schadenfreude (She rejoicing that rival Red also fared badly) to macho defiance (Esquire vowing to "grab the top slot in the quality men's market next year" although GQ is now 45,000 copies ahead of it). As befits magazine publishing's great survivor, Mansfield, 60, remains unruffled. "The British magazine business is the most aggressive and the fastest-moving in the world. The number of titles now makes it very competitive - when we launched House Beautiful, for example, there were only seven titles in its category, now there are 28. "There are also more newspaper supplements, more TV and radio stations, more internet opportunities. But there are still only 24 hours in a day - that can't be extended. So, inevitably, you're seeing an over-supply of consumer titles, and slices are being cut out of every category." In this world of over-supply, consumers are increasingly "disloyal", vexatiously willing, for instance, to buy OK! - which achieved a staggering 92.9% ABC rise - "because they want to see what Mr Beckham wore on his wedding day, even though they may not regard themselves as OK! readers". Two ploys are traditionally used to woo these fickle flibbertigibbets, and Mansfield can't abide either of them. One is "aggressive" pricing, which becomes "predatory" in the case of the store magazines which have hit NatMags hard - Sainsbury's has hurt Good Housekeeping and Homebase Living easily outsells House Beautiful. Like Hutton, he also dislikes the glut of free goodies: "Tinsel and trash is like valium - it may help immediately, but you know it's no good for you in the long run." Valium, though, is what the sales slump has driven some of his editors to taking: September She's giveaway is a copy of Sex and the City, and Esquire readers get a CD-Rom full of pin-ups. NatMags' monthlies cater for every life-stage between puberty and the menopause, taking readers from their late-teenage "freedom" years (Company) to twenties (Cosmopolitan) to early thirties (She) to 35-50 (Good Housekeeping). Comparing January-June 1999 with the same period last year, only Cosmo escaped double-digit decline. Mansfield is keenest to talk about Good Housekeeping, where Lindsay Nicholson (ex-Prima) has been hired to lead what he believes will be a "quiet revolution" in women's magazines with women over 45 moving into the ascendant. Risking insulting (implicitly callow) Cosmo and She readers, Good Housekeeping is now "the magazine for grown-up women with a sure touch". "Grown-up women have been neglected by the magazine industry," Mansfield explains. "Good Housekeeping has always had a readership median age of 42 but we just haven't been saying it before." Company, he acknowledges, is threatened by Attic Futura's B, which was "promoted very aggressively, with four issues with free gifts". Rising 11.1% while Company fell 16.5%, B is now only 6,146 copies behind it. And She, initially revived under Alison Pylkkanen, is now also reeling from a concerted attack by a new title: "Emap came out with Red and spent £6m on it - it's very difficult when you're up against that kind of investment. "But I gather they're now looking for a new editor, so perhaps it wasn't as successful as they hoped." For Mansfield, any crisis can be weathered by bringing in a woman with a surer touch when a title is clearly ailing, and otherwise relying on the power of the radiant "brand values" and "clear differentiation" of NatMags' durable monthlies to see off upstart copycat mags relying on gimmicks and hard-sell. But Sue Hawken, managing director of Emap Elan, argues that he should put his money where his mouth is: "There's an issue at NatMags about marketing. They've got lessons to learn - they're just not used to spending money on the news-stand. They talk a lot about brands but, to my mind, branding doesn't exist unless you invest in it, as we did with Red." Another industry competitor reckons that too many mags have been allowed to drift. "Cosmo is clearly missing Mandi Norwood [now editor-in-chief], who's a great editor but is working on brand extension projects. It currently looks old hat, very early 80s. Meanwhile, She seems to have gone sex-mad, which must be confusing for readers. Lindsay Nicholson is a good choice, but they were slow to react to Good Housekeeping's problems." Total Media's Hutton has a different perspective. "If you look at the annual reports, NatMags is not very profitable compared to other publishers - the profits-to-turnover ratio is far higher at IPC. So it's fair to ask: have IPC and Emap been living in the real world, while NatMags is only just discovering it? It's not just glossies, darling, it's a business." What of the future, in which the internet will pose an increasing threat to magazine circulations? Mansfield accepts there will be "erosion" of sales but envisages well-branded titles acting as a "catalyst", adding online spin-offs to existing extensions such as Cosmo books and Good Housekeeping's cable TV show. Whether he'll still be around to see the online tsunami arrive is a moot point, however. "They said that [deputy managing director] Duncan Edwards, his anointed successor, would take over in two to three years," says one publisher. "But the word in the industry is that it'll happen sooner." Another rival is harsher: "The ABCs were dreadful, and when a company loses such a huge number of copies period-on-period, it must exert pressure on a successor who's implicated in that failure. There has to be an extra urgency for him about making the change."