It is Friday afternoon and the hot sun warms the stone embankment of the River Nervion, which loops around the city of Bilbao on its way to the Bay of Biscay. It will pass shipyards, steelworks and docks which, as in most other European industrial towns, are now just reminders of a closed, or closing, chapter in history. A taxi has brought us from Sondika air terminal and, sweeping into town on the waterfront road, the driver slowed down as we passed the gleaming structure on the opposite bank. Bursting with pride and ignoring the protests of other drivers, he uttered one word through a broad smile: 'Guggenheim.' And there it was. This is what we had come to see. A sculptural creation in titanium, Spanish limestone and glass. The triangular site once occupied by an old factory and parking lot is now a series of interconnected buildings that creep underneath, up and around the Puente de la Salve, one of Bilbao's busiest road bridges, ending in a tower of structural steel and creamy stone. At the centre of the complex of curving, jutting forms is a 165ft high atrium of twisting glass. This is the fabulous Guggenheim museum, designed by award-winning Canadian architect Frank Gehry. As the staff open the tourist office for the evening, we can still glimpse round a bend in the river to the edges of Gehry's masterpiece - opened two years ago this month - the centrepiece of a redevelopment scheme that the Basque administration has been planning since the middle of the 80s. This traditional city of heavy industry dragged itself out of the great depression of the 80s with a new subway system designed by Sir Norman Foster. That was opened in 1995. The local airport has been refurbished and expanded for the millennium, and the eight bridges spanning the river have been supplemented by a new, daring, cantilevered footbridge designed by Santiago Calatrava. It has a reinforced glass walkway, which at night is lit from below. A waterfront project, adjacent to the Guggenheim, will soon see a former shipyard converted to parks, apartments, offices and shopping areas. Casco Viejo, the old town sometimes known as the seven streets, has been a protected, listed site since 1972, and is now a chic shopping area of narrow streets lined with bars and restaurants, hotels and pensions. Finding rooms is no problem. The first pension we try is full, but at the second the door is answered by a small, square woman, whose height is in perfect proportion to her width. Yes, she has rooms, and leads us through the dark, panelled hall of a once magnificent apartment on the corner of a courtyard. But stopping near a crucifix at the double doors of a large, simple room overlooking the street below she asks with a hint of mischief, 'Dos camas?' ('Two beds?'). For two men travelling together, this question sums up a generation of change since the death of Franco. With a reassuring smile, we put her at her ease: 'Si, dos camas por favor.' El Esanche, the new town, was built with the 20th century in mind, with bold architecture, wide boulevards, fountains and squares. But now Bilbao has the 21st century in mind, and its monumental motif is the polished outline of the Guggenheim. The Solomon R Guggenheim Foundation was approached by the city in 1991 with the novel idea of a new museum of modern art, financed and owned by the Basque administration but run by the Guggenheim Foundation. As well as having a permanent collection of its own, the museum would also be able to draw on the vast Guggenheim modern art collections in New York, Venice and Berlin. The interior of the museum is arranged around the breathtaking atrium, which gives the impression of non-functional construction, created solely for visual pleasure. Leaning, swirling curtains of glass compete with white monumental walls, angled and flowing, with half-hidden galleries. Move just a few feet to one side and the whole aspect changes. There must be somewhere for janitors and cleaners to keep their overalls and buckets, but it's not obvious. The exhibition space, by contrast, is simple and easily negotiable. Walkways, stairs and glass lifts connect 19 galleries, and a special 130m of column-free space running under the bridge is reserved for outsize works and temporary exhibitions. Even without the exceptional art that it contains, the building itself is worth travelling to Bilbao for. But its main function is to collect and interpret the most compelling work of 20th-century Europe and America, as well as to pay special attention to modern Basque and Spanish artists. At the entrance to the museum there is a real mood setter. Standing two storeys high is Jeff Koons' Puppy, a Trojan horse of post-modernism in the unlikely medium of pansies. The flowers are replanted in the steel structure every spring and, to mark the occasion, the Guggenheim runs art workshops on the use of unusual materials. Only those between the ages of three and 11 need apply. Like the theatre critics say: 'Unmissable.' The practicals Go (0845 6054321) has return flights from Stansted for #163;80. Three-night breaks with Kirker Holidays (020-7231 3333) cost from #163;398pp, including scheduled flights from Heathrow. The Guggenheim (tel 94 435 90 80) is open 10am-8pm, Tuesday to Sunday, admission 800 pesetas, about #163;3.50. Gumshoe's guide Friday 3.45pm: Arrive by taxi from Sondika airport ( around #163;8). 4pm: Tourist office opens and provides comprehensive hotel list, with prices. 4.30pm: Book into cheap pension, about #163;9 a night for two and right in the centre of the old town, surrounded by restaurants and bars. 5pm: Stroll through the old town and sample wine and tapas in Plaza Nueva. 7pm: Visit the art-deco Cafe Boulevard near the Arenal bridge. 9pm: Eat in Bar Rotterdam in Calle Perro. Asparagus and mushroom starters are great. Traditional bacalao al pil pil may be an acquired taste. 11pm: Retire to rooms a few doors away. 12am: Street cleaners start work - it seems as if they work all night. Revellers make their noisy way home? it seems as if they drink all night. Saturday 5am: Street cleaners are back. 9am: Breakfast in a local bar, then off to the Guggenheim. There is an army of people offering leaflets when you enter. Take one of each - they all have good deals for lunch in the area. 9pm: Eat in Restaurante Amboto in Calle Jardines, must be one of the best in town. 11pm: Bed. Street cleaners again. Even more revellers. Sunday 9am: Bleary-eyed breakfast in local cafe. 9.45am: Stroll through Paseo del Arenal. Listen to the music played on the fancy modernist bandstand. 10am: Explore El Esanche, the new town. 4pm: Bus to the airport, leaves every 40 minutes from Paseo del Arenal (about 75p).