Colourful former minister Steven Norris announced yesterday that he is to contest the Tory nomination for London mayor, predicting that he will beat the "squeaky clean losers" who have joined the fray since Jeffrey Archer's downfall. After weeks of speculation about whether he would stand, Mr Norris said he was the only Tory capable of defeating Ken Livingstone or Frank Dobson, despite having a string of high-profile love affairs. "The Conservatives need someone who can win," he told BBC1's Breakfast with Frost. "Frankly, I think that the notion of a squeaky clean loser is just preposterous." His declaration came amid reports that Mr Dobson was "on the verge of a breakdown" over the way his campaign to win the Labour nomination is being masterminded by Millbank. Margaret McDonagh, the Labour party general secretary, has reportedly called on ministers to telephone Mr Dobson to cheer him up. Trevor Phillips, Mr Dobson's deputy, yesterday came close to confirming that the former health secretary was feeling depressed when he said that he had taken time out to spend with his friends and family. Mr Livingstone said: "I think [the mayoral campaign] is very much something he has been pushed into and I don't think he is happy." The disarray in Labour rubbed off on the Tories yesterday, when Mr Norris rubbished his Tory opponents and made clear that he opposes William Hague's support for section 28 of the local government act, which bans "promotion" of homosexuality in schools. His "squeaky clean losers" comment was aimed principally at Baroness Miller of Hendon, a former chairwoman of the London Tories, who has been encouraged by the party leadership to run. Tory central office is nervous that Mr Norris, 54, who has had five mistresses, could suffer a similar fate to Lord Archer, who resigned as the party's mayoral candidate last month after admitting he had persuaded a friend to lie on his behalf. To the annoyance of Mr Norris, who came second to Lord Archer in the original contest for the Tory nomination, Mr Hague ordered a rerun. Mr Norris admitted yesterday that he had skeletons in the cupboard, but said he still remained the strongest Tory candidate. "I am what I am," he said. "You can either say it is fortunate or unfortunate that all my skeletons are dancing around the back pages of any tabloid you care to read." He will give the Tory leadership another headache speaking out on issues such as section 28, over which the party's frontbench spokesman on London, Shaun Woodward, was sacked. "I don't take the same view as William and he has made it very clear that that's a matter for me," Mr Norris said. His independence of thought would be reflected in his London mayor manifesto if he won the nomination, he said. "My manifesto will come from Conservative principles. But it is mine. If there were a minor difference on a minor issue [Mr Hague] would expect me to stand up for what I believe in. I'm not going to be anyone's poodle." The other Tory candidates are: John Wilkinson, the Ruislip Northwood MP; the businessmen Ivan Massow, Andrew Boff and Mark Kotecha; and former Lambeth Conservative group leader Bernard Gentry.