Eighty former psychiatric patients are to sue the NHS after being prescribed the hallucinogen LSD without giving their consent. The patients, who were treated at psychiatric hospitals across Britain during the 1950s and 1960s, claim to have suffered damaging side effects. The action, which will be heard in the high court next year, centres on allegations that psychiatrists prescribed the unlicensed drug for a wide range of conditions without receiving proper consent or fully understanding the implications of treatment. More than 20 NHS authorities are involved and a deadline of February 2000 was yesterday set for claimants wishing to join the litigation. David Harris, senior partner at Alexander Harris, solicitor for the claimants, said: "In the 1950s through to the early 1970s LSD was administered by the NHS for a wide range of conditions, on the basis that it opened up patients' minds more quickly than going through a process of normal therapy. "Many of those who have come forward allege that they have suffered long-term side effects including flashbacks, and for some the effects of the LSD have been very traumatic." The drug was given to patients suffering from conditions such as post-natal depression and mild phobias. As well as violent flashbacks some of the claimants complain of recurring nightmares and depression. "LSD was not a licensed drug and all those whom we have spoken to believe that they were not asked to give their consent," said Mr Harris. One patient who received LSD treatment in the early 60s claims she was given the drug as a treatment in itself rather than as an accompaniment to therapy, and that her complaints about the terrifying effects were ignored by hospital staff. "The first time they gave me the drug they gave it to me as a drink and left me. I blacked out and it took nearly 24 hours until I recovered. It was a frightening experience," said Valerie Bateson, who was 22 when she was admitted to a Stockport hospital's psychiatric ward suffering from post-natal depression in 1964. "The bits I remember were terrifying - it was like walking through a thick mist. Other people who were on the ward at the time have told me I would scratch things and claw at the cuddly toys I'd brought with me. When I came to they were all ripped up. "I complained about it to the doctor and the second time they gave me a smaller dose as an injection, which wasn't so bad as it only lasted six or seven hours. But then another doctor said they didn't have time to give me injections and that I had to drink the stronger dose. "After that, each day I was due to take LSD I took holy communion in the morning because I thought it was going to be my last day on earth," said Mrs Bateson. After being discharged after three months, she developed monophobia, a strong fear of being alone, and became unable to hold down a job, and has not spent a day on her own for nearly 35 years. "If I'm on my own I just can't function properly. It has ruined my life and my husband's. What I want is a little bit of justice, and for the NHS to admit they shouldn't have given it to us," she said. Dr Tonmoy Sharma, head of cognitive psychopharmacology at the Institute of Psychiatrists, said LSD was administered without any evidence that it could be of benefit. "I think it was used as an experimental treatment. There was no scientific evidence at the time to support the case that LSD was beneficial. Today we use cognitive techniques to deal with depression and phobias," he said. A spokesman of Vizard Oldham, solicitors acting for the NHS, said: "We are defending the action and are gathering expert evidence. The difficulty with the case is that these things are alleged to have happened 30 or 40 years ago, and not all the NHS staff involved are still alive."