Plant names can be a bad dyslexic joke. Try this for size: Paeonia mlokosewitschii. Less of an obvious gobstopper, but also tricky in a kind of smooth don't-take-your-eyes-off-the-ball kind of way is Paeonia cambessedeseii. Mlokosewitschii and cambessedeseii are the easy bits - it's paeonia that always catches me. Let's plump for peony. The common peony (Paeonia officinalis) starts poking through the ground in March, with leaves clinging to the stems. Both are a rich burgundy red before the leaves start to unfurl and change to their more familiar pale green. The flower buds then start to swell, reaching the size of golf balls before emerging like a happy hybrid of water lily and rose. I love the leaves of the common peony - the way they hold themselves so confidently, never the main show, but a serrated, chalky green backdrop that grows as fast as any other herbaceous plant in the border. And it is as part of that very English, cottage-garden mixed border that peonies are used to best advantage, bringing a perfect balance of flower and foliage. There are four categories of peony flowers: single, semi-double, double and Japanese or anemone form. The single variety flowers earlier than the multi-petalled types, and varies from the relative delicacy of the Himalayan peony (P emodi), which has white flowers that act as a ruff to display the golden stamens, to the starkness of the beautiful red P tenuifolia. Some of the doubles are held in place by the outer petals - ‘Marie Lemoine' is like a cup of pale-petalled lemon froth. Others, such as the white ‘Duchesse de Nemours' or ‘Monsieur Jules Elie', just explode out. The Japanese type has a central cushion of long, slim petals or petaloids, contrasting with the outer ring of petals, often in colour as well as form. ‘Bowl of Beauty' is a much-celebrated example. The tree peony was developed by the Chinese more than a thousand years ago but, like Buddhism and tea, gardening was made more sophisticated by the Japanese. The first plants were introduced into Britain in the 18th century and cultivated at Wormleybury by Sir Abraham Hume. More were collected from China and Japan by Robert Fortune between 1843 and 1862 (along with such established modern garden plants as Jasminum nudiflorum, Weigela florida, Dicentra spectabilis, Prunus triloba, Primula japonica, Cryptomeria japonica, rhododendrons, azaleas and the original parent of the pompom chrysanthemum). As its name, P suffruticosa, suggests (suffruticosa always refers to a woody or shrubby base), the tree peony has woody, rather antlerish stems or branches that remain all winter. They develop very substantial root systems - which I found to my cost last winter when I moved a pair of P delavayi and did my back in as a result - and can become large shrubs. Tree peony flowers are often not as individually spectacular as many of the herbaceous varieties, but the massed effect can be stupendously good. In the case of P delavayi, they are an unusually burnished brown - almost bronze - which is why I moved them to the jewel garden. Tree peonies can be tender and are best planted out of the way of cold winds, but you should resist the temptation to cut back any seemingly dead wood until well into spring, as there is often a bud hidden within a brown, scaly casing. The herbaceous P lactiflora also came from China, and it is taller and more elegant than our P officinalis, but slow to develop and a bit tricky to germinate. This inevitably makes it expensive. Nevertheless, the Chinese bred it for a thousand years before the west had a go. The Chinese use P lactiflora and P suffruticosa for treating a number of complaints but, medical properties aside, the leaves alone are justification for giving them garden space, as they are much more finely divided than the common peony and flushed with a hint of bronzy purple, which starts strongly in the stem and then leaches out into the leaves themselves. There's also a yellow form, P delavayi lutea, which I have not seen, but sounds good. The best yellow peony is perhaps our original tongue-twister, P mlokosewitschii. It apparently originates from an area of open hornbeam woodland in the south-east Caucasus but, like most peonies, adapts to almost any type of well-drained soil. The flowers don't last long, but are worth their brief, golden stay. The leaves are quite different from the common peony, being rounded with purple stems. There is one British peony species, P mascula, on the island of Steep Holme in the Bristol Channel. This was only discovered in 1803, even though the island had been botanised pretty thoroughly for the previous 200 years, and it seems likely that, rather than being indigenous, it is naturalised as a survivor from the physic garden of the Augustinian monks who lived there between 1166 and 1260. The peony was an important component in the medieval medical arsenal, and no self-respecting herb garden would have been without it. It was a cure for nightmares and depression, tummy ache and jaundice. A drink was made from a diffusion of the roots which, according to A Modern Herbal, by Mrs M Grieve (first published in 1931), ‘are composed of several oblong knobs, hanging by strings fastened to the main head'. Don't try this at home - the roots are poisonous. Which might be why it was a plant with a strong cloak of magic about it, to the extent that, according to Gerard (he of the eponymous Herbal), you could not dig it up, because ‘to pluck it up by the roots will cause danger to he that touches it, therefore a string must be fastened to it in the night and a hungry dog tied thereto, who being allured by the smell of roasted flesh set towards him, may pluck it up by the roots'. Even Pliny thought it could cause trouble: ‘For if any man shall pluck of the fruit in the daytime, being seen of the woodpecker, he is in danger of losing his eyes.' You have been warned. It is true that peonies dislike being moved, but not at all true that they cannot be moved. We have one that has been shunted about the garden at least twice and is looking radiant. The best time to reposition peonies is in early autumn, when they can be dug up, the roots divided (with a bud attached) and replanted. They will then get established before winter, ready to grow away the following spring. It is best to plant them shallowly, with the crowns no more than an inch below the surface, in light shade, with very well dug and well manured soil beneath them for the roots to delve into. If they produce no flowers the year after planting, it is likely to be because they were put too deeply into the ground. But peonies are best left undisturbed, and will respond by living to a contented old age of up to a hundred years.