A solicitor was last night facing life imprisonment after being found guilty of murdering her two baby boys during a 14-month period in which she suffered from depression and loneliness and resorted to binge drinking. Sally Clark, 35, of Wilmslow, Cheshire, was found guilty by majority verdicts of killing 11 week-old Christopher in December 1996, and eight week-old Harry in January last year. It was, said Robin Spencer QC for the Crown, a case that struck "at the very core of everything natural and wholesome in the relationship between mother and child". But Clark's husband Stephen, who gave evidence for the defence during the 18-day trial, vowed to appeal the conviction and criticised the prosecution case, which was largely based on medical evidence. Clark denied the charges, claiming that both deaths were the result of cot death, or Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (Sids). But the court heard that the chance of two cases of Sids occurring in a comfortably off family was 73m to one, and that the similarities between the deaths were inconsistent with Sids and beyond coincidence. Both children died about 9.30pm, on both occasions Clark was alone with them, and on both occasions Mr Clark was away from home or about to go away on business. Clark retained her composure in the dock at Chester crown court, breathing deeply as the jury of seven women and five men returned their verdict after eight hours of deliberation. She will be sentenced after the preparation of background reports, but will receive mandatory life sentences. Mr Clark pledged to clear his wife's name in a statement read by solicitor Mike Mackey. "During both their short lives my wife was a caring, devoted mother to our sons. They were not murdered and she is innocent. She is being convicted on the basis of flawed evidence and statistics," he said. "I would ask any parent who has suffered the tragedy of cot death to come forward and help us put right this terrible wrong and prevent others having to tread this awful path. "There's much for me to do and in the next few weeks I ask that the media give me the privacy required to renew my strength for the fight ahead." The court was told that Clark had murdered her first child while Mr Clark was at his office Christmas party. Despite some irregular postmortem findings, including bruising to the legs and a cut lip, it was found that Christopher had died from Sids. The death was re-examined after Harry died, and the autopsy pathologist revised his view that death was from natural causes. Clark killed Harry while her husband was downstairs preparing a bottle for the child, the court was told. Earlier that day she made two visits to the off-licence to buy eight or nine bottles of wine - lying that she was giving a dinner party. After the verdict, Detective Inspector John Gardner of Cheshire police defended the failure to launch a murder investigation after Christopher's death. "The situation was that there was only a certain amount of evidence at that stage. The decision was made that we were not then looking at a criminal act," he said, adding: "You have to realise you are probably dealing with the hardest thing you will ever have to do as a police officer - to confront a parent and ask them about the accusation of killing their own children." The couple, who have a third child, moved into a £250,000 cottage in the prosperous Cheshire town of Wilmslow in 1995 after she got a job at a solicitors' firm in Manchester where Mr Clark is also employed. But their time there was blighted by Clark's drinking, and bouts of depression and loneliness. Mr Clark was often away from home and his wife became well known at the local off-licence. The jury heard no evidence of Clark's drinking problem, but a committal hearing heard that she was struggling with alcohol when she became pregnant with Christopher in 1995, and within weeks of killing him she was drinking again. Four months later she was pregnant with Harry, and within six months she was back at work, where her drinking was of increasing concern to colleagues. Alcohol counselling failed to stem her drinking and after repeated instances of drunkenness at work she received a final warning in May 1997. In July, five months' pregnant with Harry, she was sent home on extended maternity leave.