The stresses and pressures of work are helping to tip a third of all employees every year into depression or other mental health problems, the Royal College of Psychiatrists claims. Depression is taking a serious toll in the workplace, with damaging consequences not only to sufferers but also employers. Depressed people work less efficiently and are prone to more accidents than their healthy colleagues. Colleagues and managers may notice uncharacteristically poor performance without understanding the reason, says a leaflet launched yesterday by the college. People suffering from depression may be working more slowly than usual, making more mistakes and be unable to concentrate. They may be forgetful and turn up late - if they turn up at all. They may get into arguments and make life even more difficult for themselves by trying to compensate for their feeling of inadequacy by working far too hard and refusing to delegate. It may seem as though a perfectly good worker is losing his or her grip, but the underlying cause could be depression. Boring repetitive tasks, uncertainty about the future and difficult managers who bully and criticise can all cause tension. Cramped offices, noisy factories and hot and stuffy shops may make things worse. The faster pace of the computer-centred working life can step up the pressure. But work is unlikely to be entirely to blame. Research shows that heredity and upbinging play an equal part in causing depression with the sufferer's work or social circumstances at the time. The leaflet, entitled Depression in the Workplace, outlines typical symptoms. They include sadness which does not change from day to day, crying for no apparent reason, anxiety, iritability, disturbed sleep, altered appetite and change in weight, tiredness, lack of motivation and thoughts of worthlessness. "Four symptoms for more than a few weeks is a depressive episode," said David Baldwin, a psychiatrist from Southampton university. Treatment with antidepressants and psychotherapy can help. But work can also be part of the solution. The main goal of many people with depression is to get back to work. "Work is psychologically beneficial to us all," said Dennis Ferriday of the faculty of occupational medicine at the Royal College of Physicians. Retirement and redundancy can precipitate depression. Dr Ferriday urged businesses to recognise their responsibilities to workers with mental health problems. "Companies need a mental health policy, supported by senior management," he said.