Last July, my younger sister suffered a psychotic breakdown and tried to commit suicide after a two-year struggle with depression. She now lives with my parents in a tiny village where she knows no one, and, apart from phone calls from myself, our brothers and sister and a friend in the United States, she is not in contact with anyone she used to know. Although she will not speak about how she feels, I know she is heartbroken by the reaction of people she thought were friends. A year before her breakdown, she fell out with the person she considered her best friend. What she told their friends is unclear but all have followed suit. My sister's attempts to reconcile her friendships have either been met by silence or abuse. She has always been an incredibly supportive and loyal friend herself. I can't bear to see her so unhappy. What should I do? Don't judge her friends I have been a friend to several people suffering from depression. I have to say that I can understand anyone giving up on such a relationship. Only my faith that they will eventually get better has enabled me to carry on. Depression colours the perception of every action and word and also wipes out memories of good things. A friendly "How are you?" results in an outpouring of problems and anger. In order to avoid upsetting the sufferer again, that person then avoids contact, feeling that they are not helping. I have been told by the sufferer that mutual friends want nothing to do with them and then find out that those people have been calling regularly. The person with depression is unable to see that their perceptions are due to the depression until they are on the road to recovery. However, this then reduces their confidence in their ability to judge things and that is another stage to work through. Being a friend to such a person requires that you are aware of your own limitations of time and energy and being strong enough not to get swamped by the sufferer's needs - however much you give, it will not be seen to be enough. Please don't judge your sister's friends too harshly, especially if you've only heard her version of events. I'm glad that she is recovering, but it does take time. Her life has shattered and she'll need to make a new one. Help her to find confidence in new or rediscovered interests and she will gradually make natural friends through this. Name and address withheld Ignorance is not bliss Despite being a sufferer myself, and having battled for a number of years with both my mother and my sisters illnesses, people's reactions to mental health problems still fill me with amazement and sadness. I have had good friends who have at the crucial point in my distress disappeared into the horizon, and others who have unexpectedly got their head around my head, and stayed around. I know that the initial rush of support slackens off as the illness shows its hideous staying power and tenacity. Friends dropping off the face of the earth seemed to confirm my own low self-esteem and poured fuel on my fire. I did shut down to a bare minimum of friends and was lucky that they did not walk away as so many had. They offered me time, lots of coffee and laughter. The "friends" in this case need to wake up and smell the coffee. They need to learn about mental health problems, and how their evasive behaviour is feeding the beast and not fighting it. Megan Oakley, Bristol Find new friends As I see it, there is no point in even considering the idea of trying to bring about a change of heart in your sister's "best friend". Her motives, one could guess at, range from fear of being hurt again if your sister attempted suicide again to having had some sort of rescue fantasy about your sister which she can no longer sustain. Either way she has acted in a way which suggests she does not have much insight into her own feelings and is not a good communicator. This means you are unlikely to be able to influence her decision. It also means she is the opposite of the sort of best friend a depressed person really needs. Far better for your sister to spend some time examining how she chooses her friends (maybe a counsellor or cognitive therapist could help) and then when she is feeling stronger (antidepressants could help) taking a few risks to find a new sort of friend. Mike Bryson, via email Time to build trust My sister had a psychotic breakdown after years of obsessive behaviour. Our family experience was that the "fight" against the depression took the form of her denying that she had a problem and refusing all offers of medical and therapeutic treatment. We got just a glimpse of the trail of persecution of friends and professionals who tried to help her. I only understood how it felt when she turned on our elderly father. Our experience highlighted to me how easy it is to over or under react to psychotic behaviour. Separating the mental illness and the resultant behaviour is very difficult for those close to the patient. We found it counter productive trying to help and be supportive as one would in physical illness, and left us questioning our own santity. Your sister needs to understand this when she contacts her friends. She is ready to move on while they are naturally anxious. It is a process that takes time because the trust has been lost and is the last thing to return. My sister is in a new relationship now, with somebody who knows of her condition but has not experienced the effects first hand. He has faith in her, so maybe in time her friends can make that leap. VJ, Herts Next week I am a married man in my 50s. As a youth, I frequently had sexual encounters with other boys, but always fell in love with girls. In my 20s and 30s, I virtually lost (or suppressed) my gay side and I have been very happily married. I was never unfaithful to my wife. However, I am now finding that this whole side of my sexuality is resurfacing and is becoming more and more dominant. I am strongly tempted to stray on the gay side, but so far have only indulged in phone sex and other fantasy aids. I would never dream of having an affair with a woman because I love my wife dearly and would never do anything to hurt her. But somehow doing it with a man doesn't seem like cheating - more like something completely outside the frame and not relevant to a heterosexual relationship. Am I being totally stupid? I dare say this is a common worry for married bisexuals, but advice would be welcome. • Private Lives appears every Friday. Each week we publish a letter to which readers are invited to respond. Replies, giving an account of your personal experience, should reach us by Thursday. Readers are also welcome to propose other problems, of around 300 words. Write to Private Lives, The Guardian, 119 Farringdon Road, London EC1R 3ER, fax 0171 239 9935, email privatelives@theguardian.com