On Bullfighting A L Kennedy Yellow Jersey Press £10, pp180 The title of this book is misleading, for it is not a book about bullfighting. At least, not exclusively. Neither a straightforward history, nor a vindication or criticism of an icon of Spanish culture that is at once sport, art, theatre and ritual, this slim book is a raw account of depression, a writer's loss of vocation, an unwilling struggle to complete a commission. The interface comes with A L Kennedy's rather tenuous attempts to draw a parallel between the vocation of the writer and that of the matador, to see something of her own predicament in the naked, life-or-death confrontation with the bull. It is a parallel with obvious limitations. The book begins with a confession more candid than any interviewer has ever managed to extract from Kennedy. It is an account of her recent suicide attempt, the apex of a period of depression occasioned by, among other things, the failure of a relationship and a 'loss of faith' that she never calls anything as prosaic as writer's block. Recounting the episode with terse, distanced humour, brittle with irony, she acknowledges the tangential nature of this introduction to a book ostensibly about bullfighting, but emphasises this connection: the authentic Spanish corrida is about choosing to confront death, facing it knowingly, and she too has done this and survived. Lorca called it a 'religious mystery'. Writing about bullfighting was always going to be a daunting task after Hemingway ('The Hemingway bravado did nothing for me'). Kennedy provides, in the first part of the book, an eclectic and fascinating cultural history of the corrida, embracing the ancient symbolism of the bull; breeding and selection; the Civil War and the death of Lorca; duende, gypsy influences and Andalusian culture; the training of matadors and the rituals and superstitions surrounding the performance in the ring. Filtered into the narrative is the story of her own research trips to Spain; the physical illness she suffers while travelling; glimpsed memories that shed thin shafts of light on the origin of her depression but never wholly illuminate it; and one of the most convincing descriptions I have read of the nature of vocation, 'the burn of self-perpetuating outrage' that leads some individuals to strive after their ambitions: 'Think of it for a moment - the sense of constricted potential that makes each small town smaller, each deprivation a constant weight, that can tip despair into desperation, into desperate acts. 'And then listen for the voice that tells you the daily humiliations of the world are absolutely all that you deserve. And then there's the other voice, the one that says you were made for better things, are better than these things, that you can escape them by excelling, by finding that certain something that seems to be calling you.' She is talking here about matadors, many of whom grew up in poor families and humble circumstances dreaming of success in the plaza. But she is also talking about every aspiring writer, actor, musician, boxer, artist who believed that their talent alone would be enough to lift them above their background, who had a sense of destiny. She is talking, you suspect, about herself. The latter half of the book is constructed around accounts of several bullfights Kennedy watched in Madrid and Seville, theory meshing with reality, and it is here that the book begins to unravel. Even for a writer as accomplished as Kennedy, recreating a spectacle so visual, dramatic and immediate as a bullfight is a tough challenge, but describing several corridas in succession and making each one live differently is almost impossible. This catalogue of corridas witnessed should be, in narrative terms, the climax of the book, the moment when all the abstract history becomes concentrated in the person of one man facing one bull. Kennedy's descriptions of this unpredictable choreography are meticulously detailed and engaging, but they are too many; even with first-hand experience of watching bullfights, I found the final chapters beginning to feel laboured. This is an unhappy book; a book about dreams sought, and about failure. Kennedy returns again and again to the loneliness of the matador as a means of mitigating her own pain. She watches two toreros seriously gored and returns to her empty home with no clear conclusions, no renewal of hope or of her gift. Ironically, her writing here is as startling and crafted as it has always been, so that it is unclear quite what she feels she has lost. But she leaves herself and the reader in a strange limbo, never really touching the mystery at the heart of the bullfight, nor that at the heart of the writer. • To order On Bullfighting for £7 plus 99p p&amp;p, call Observer CultureShop on 0800 3168 171.