This week, the NHS opened an Internet service. It is not an on-line facility, in which one can talk to a doctor; that remains the province of the NHS Direct telephone service, staffed by nurses who advise callers on whether they need further help. It is an information service, which includes tips on how to stay healthy, and a guide to 20 common health problems treatable at home. To diagnose yourself you click on to a body map, which has breasts but no other features of gender, and an arrow pointing politely at the belly-button for "reproductive system", thus preserving the decorums; clicking on it produces a list of ailments long enough to give a hypochondriac a heart attack. Two thousand years ago Plutarch counselled a moderate diet, exercise and restful sleep as the basis of good health. Nothing has since happened to humankind to render his advice obsolete. But plenty has happened to make all three harder to get. People dig their graves with their teeth, as the saying goes; their muscles and organs grow soft and fatty from physical idleness, and stress destroys their rest, so that they toss in their beds, unless a drug blunts their disquiet, sleeping pills or alcohol. For this disease ("dis-ease") there is a simple but powerful prescription, offered by Bertrand Russell; the key to happiness, he said, is to worry about things only when relevant. If you cannot do anything about your overdraft at three in the morning, stop thinking about it until you can. There are contrasting opinions about the kind of advice offered by Plutarch. A Spanish proverb says: "If you would live in health, be old early." That is contradicted by GB Shaw's cheerful urging to "use your health, even to the point of wearing it out. That is what it is for. Spend all you have before you die; and do not outlive yourself." Shaw was a teetotal vegetarian who lived to be bright as a button in his nineties, which hardly qualifies him to prompt others along Dorian Gray's route. More people go to doctors now, proportionally, than before the NHS began; and we are healthier and longer-lived than then. Which way round does the connection go? Are we better for seeing doctors more often, or are we better because of diet and hygiene, but less tolerant of minor ailments? Some suggest that doctors have taken over from priests as comforters and confessors; the Prozac tablet is the wafer of salvation. It seems that about a third of surgery visits are related to psychological difficulties. The words "health" and "wholeness" come from the same root - old Saxon and Early English words like "hool," "heil" and "hale" (as in "hale and hearty") meaning unwounded, entire, sound. These concepts in turn echo the ancient idea that health is a form of bodily and mental integrity, in which nothing is missing or amiss: a balance as the ancients had it, between the wet, cold, hot and dry "humours". They constructed a system of medicine on this idea, based on prevention first and cure by diet second. Most famous among them was Galen, physician to Marcus Aurelius, who began life as a "therapeutes" (an attendant) on the god of healing, Asclepius, and travelled the Roman world gathering medical lore. After serving as surgeon to the gladiators, he taught anatomy and physiology, and practised animal vivisection for research. He taught that the fundamental principle of life is air, and said that venous and arterial blood constitute two different circulatory systems. It is good to live in modern times. What is health? It is what you have when you do not notice you have it. "Sickness is felt, but health not at all," says Thomas Fuller. This is not, despite appearances, the obverse of Oliver Wendell Holmes's claim, "If you mean to keep as well as possible, the less you think about your health the better," which is bad advice; health deserves thought, and a modicum of care: for prevention is best, early cure is second best, and both require a sensible watchfulness. Health is not an end in itself, it is the principal instrument for the enjoyment of life: "health exists for life, and life exists for the love of music and beautiful things," said Chesterton; and he is right on both counts.