The prime minister yesterday stood inside a new state of the art day-surgery centre, a glorious piece of modern architecture at the Central Middlesex hospital, and outlined his vision for the NHS. This is an example of how it has to be - like BUPA not like pre-war fever hospitals. The NHS has to look and feel as good as every other part of people's lives. He said in an interview yesterday that if Clement Attlee came back now he would see an almost complete transformation in the private sector, "but he'd recognise a lot of the public sector". Announcing a whole new system for letting patients choose when they go into hospital with firm booking dates, he is pushing and shoving at the NHS to treat its patients like customers. That means wresting power from doctors and making them wait on their patients, an unthinkable change in medical culture. Private affluence and public squalor is all around us, the legacy of years of public underspending at a time of phenomenal growth in average private wealth. Where once the average family found public spaces and facilities more glorious than their own humble habitations - swimming baths, libraries, great civic buildings, transport, fine schools and hospitals - now the public sphere is the scruffiest, dirtiest, least welcoming, hardest to use aspect of most people's lives, slow, reluctant, off-hand, second-best services. Blair yesterday called himself "a man with a mission - a mission to transform and modernise the country". Can it be done? The NHS will be his hardest test, always in the public eye and nearly always on the political critical list. Waiting lists are the only indicators that get noticed which is why Labour made the fateful error before the election of promising what it knew it should never have promised - to reduce total numbers on lists by 100,000 by the next election. Since this is the hardest pledge to keep, you can almost time the next election date by how close the government gets to achieving it. The target should have been to cut the time waited, not numbers waiting. Spending far too much on it, staggering under the weight of that political imperative, crude waiting numbers are down by 60,000: new figures are out tomorrow. The squeeze on waiting for operations has turned into a bulge in numbers waiting to see a consultant to get onto the waiting list. But running harder, using every wheeze, treating quick cases before more urgent ones and squandering substantial sums that should be better spent, whatever it takes, the target will be hit. While health ministers act as firemen, hosing down long waits with more and more money - £30m extra last week for the outpatient waiters - the prime minister attacks the NHS from an entirely novel angle. He acts as the outsider, the patient who wants quick, easy, convenient treatment, cutting a swathe through the thickets of old traditional NHS habits. He rightly puts himself in the shoes of the impatient man who might take out private insurance if the NHS becomes too slow or too irritating to use. So he ordered walk-in clinics in the high street at convenient times, avoiding waiting for GP appointments and losing half a day's work. NHS Direct, a new telephone service, already covers 40% of Britain with a medic to answer enquires and give advice when people need it. And now there will be pre-booked operations, instead of waiting for the hospital to summon you summarily at some unspecified and inconvenient time. The doctor's time is no longer more precious than the patient's. Only consider how differently the same consultant behaves in his NHS clinic and his private practice, and you get the idea. A pre-booked appointment system doesn't sound revolutionary. But the BMA has opposed every part of this patient-friendly agenda. Why? Because giving power to patients takes power away from doctors. The first few pilot schemes for pre-booking chose hospitals with enthusiastic consultants: they warn that things may look very different when the next raft involves doctors who may want nothing to do with it. A surgeon traditionally measures his prestige by the length of his waiting list. It not only implies he's good, popular and in demand, but it drums up business for his private practice, encouraging patients to jump the queue by paying cash. To make a pre-booking system work, the pilot schemes have shown two things: a waiting list has to be kept below six months, so it drives waiting times down, an improvement which everyone will applaud. But it also requires surgeons to pool their lists to maximise flexibility, so patients are referred to a department not a named doctor - and consultants will lose control over their own lists. So this is the death knell of the mighty personal empire of the consultant, the Gods of the ward round with their own "firm" of juniors acting autonomously, beyond the reach of managers or the scrutiny of colleagues. While many consultants work devotedly for the NHS far longer hours than contracted, others spend more time in private practice or on the golf course with huge unexplained variations in their productivity. This dangerous ground was left untouched by Tory reforms, fearing to seize managerial control over consultants' clinical autonomy: the doctors will fight like fury against pre-booking when they realise what it means. GPs are already up in arms over the walk-in high street clinics and NHS Direct, both undermining their role as sole NHS gatekeepers. They see the writing on the wall: they will have to offer clinics in the evenings and weekends when working patients can get there. Since they cling to their status as private contractors, not state employees, they will now be pushed to cater to patients' needs, not the other way round. Last time I mentioned this I had an avalanche of outraged letters from over-worked GPs but they will just have to work differently, and yes, the government will no doubt have to pay extra for that flexibility. Tony Blair is right. The patient has to come first if the NHS is to thrive and not leach away support into the private sector: a very large number of the middle classes now have the money to pay for one-off consultations, operations or to visit a private GP if the health service stays so difficult to access. Its command economy has to give way to consumer demand. But that fine mission needs a lot more money. So far Labour is spending barely more than the Tories, nowhere near not enough to turn a shabby health or education service into Pullman class. In yesterday's interview the prime minister promised that overflowing treasury coffers will pay out far more to health and education, increasing each year over the next ten years, with no more damaging stop-go, spend-and-cut cycles. There is no way to judge him yet. All that matters is that in ten years we have schools, hospitals and transport that look and feel as well-equipped, well-staffed and good to use as the "have a nice day" culture of the private sector.