Milburn announces biggest anti-smoking campaign ever The government's biggest ever anti-smoking campaign is to be launched next month, health secretary Alan Milburn announced today. He told the Commons at question time ministers remained committed to reducing smoking and he defended the government's policy on curbing tobacco advertising. But Tories attacked the exemption from the tobacco advertising ban granted to formula one motor racing, which caused a crisis for Labour two years ago when it emerged F1 chief Bernie Ecclestone had donated £1 million to the party. The money was handed back during the subsequent row but, under the EU tobacco advertising directive, F1 was still given an exemption from the ban until 2006. But Tory health spokesman Caroline Spelman demanded: "Given the fact that the Government is at odds which its chief medical officer over the exemption of F1 racing from the ban on tobacco advertising, do you still believe that a ban on sponsorship will help reduce smoking? "Because if you do, what can possibly be the medical justification for the Government delaying moves to prohibit tobacco sponsorship of F1 until 2006?" Mr Milburn accused the Conservatives of being "a bunch of Johnny-come-latelys" who he said now supported a ban which they had made no effort to introduce during their years in power. Compulsory treatment under fire from Lib Dems The government today defended plans to make treatment compulsory for some people with mental health problems. People forced to have treatment under reformed mental health legislation would have enhanced legal rights, health minister of state John Hutton told the Commons at question time. The green paper on reform of the mental health act published last week detailed the proposal for compulsory care and treatment orders which could apply either in hospital or the community. Liberal Democrat health spokesman Nick Harvey demanded assurances that the "potentially draconian" measure would not be used as a substitute for a "shrinking mental health service". Mr Hutton retorted: "That's a load of nonsense. The answer to your question is no." The present mental health service was failing and it was "not an option" not to change the law, he insisted. Congestion charges steam ahead The first group of councils wishing to impose congestion or workplace carparking charges should be announced next month, the government disclosed tonight. Twenty-seven have expressed interest in levying the charges - included in this session's transport bill, junior transport minister Keith Hill said in a Commons written reply. The government has written to them asking them to confirm their interest. "Following receipt of confirmation, we expect to announce their names next month," he said. Aircraft carrier contract takes off Competitive contracts worth £29.4 million have been placed for the assessment phase of the future aircraft carrier project, junior defence minister Peter Kilfoyle announced today. The contracts for the so-called CVF scheme, placed with British Aerospace land and sea systems Ltd and Thomson-CSF NCS France, consist of two phases. "The first phase of each contract, worth £5.9 million, will involve work to examine a variety of aircraft carrier design options," said Mr Kilfoyle in a Commons written reply. "The second phase, worth a further £23.5 million, will involve risk reduction on the preferred carrier design option when the decision on the selection of FCBA has been taken," said the minister. "Progression to this second phase will be subject to BAe and Thomson-CSF satisfactorily completing the first package of work."