In a move which could transform our understanding of depression, scientists are planning to test British mental patients for traces of a virus that causes behavioural problems in animals. They believe that if they can prove Borna disease virus, or BDV, causes emotional problems in humans, it could explain the unusually high rate of suicide and depression in rural areas. Scientists in other countries already have evidence that people suffering from behavioural problems - such as compulsive hand-washing - are six times as likely to carry traces of the virus, but this will be the first investigation into the virus in this country. The disease was first identified in horses in Germany more than a century ago, when animals were observed staggering and walking strangely. They were said to be "not right in themselves". The virus has since been found in a handful of species - including ostriches, sheep and rabbits - in different parts of the world. In New Zealand, it has been suggested that what is known as wobbly possum disease is caused by a similar virus. The precise symptoms vary - it can be fatal. Infected mice tend to endlessly run in circles, attacking and maiming their tails, while cats become wobbly on their feet. The virus is poorly understood and so unusual that a special category has been invented for it. Doctors believe the microbe attacks cells in the brain which control mood, emotion and behaviour, but no one is sure how the virus is transmitted - or even whether it can be passed between species. However there is a suspicion that nasal secretions could act as a transmission route from pets to humans. Dr Jennifer Higham, a senior lecturer in medical microbiology at the University of Northumbria, will be running the pilot study into BDV in Britain. The received wisdom is that rural suicide rates are caused by isolation, sheep dip chemicals, frustration and poverty, but she suggests contact with animals could be partly to blame. "The idea now is that things like schizophrenia and behavioural problems are caused by a variety of factors," she says. "There's a sliding scale between good health and schizophrenia, and there are a number of genetic and environmental factors that determine where you are on the scale. "The theory is that the virus could be the factor which pushes someone over the hurdle." No research has been done into the arrival or spread of the virus in this country. Britain has had only one reported outbreak when it was found in 10 out of 111 cats submitted to Bristol University's veterinary science departments for a study into the feline form of mad cow disease. Dr Higham and her team want to know if the virus is carried by other British pets, as well as by humans. They will begin their study by analysing blood samples from both mental patients and horses in the Newcastle area. If they can prove that BDV is a causal agent in depression or any form of behavioural problem, it will be good news for sufferers. "It will give us the lead to do something about it," says Dr Higham. "You can take the viral factor out of the equation." • You can email the Guardian's health editor Emily Wilson at health@theguardian.com.