Mental health services for troubled children and teenagers are in disarray, a report by the audit commission said today. Sorting out the services will be essential if the government is to achieve key goals under its social exclusion programme, the spending watchdog is warning. David Browning, leader of the commission team which produced the report, said the services should have a cost effective "stitch in time" role in putting a stop to problems at an early stage. But, he said, "what we have is a picture of small, under-developed and pretty random services that nobody has really thought about". Estimates suggest that as many as one in five children and adolescents suffers some form of mental health problem, ranging from acute anxi ety to psychosis. American research indicates that perhaps one in 25 - one child in every class at school - requires specialist services. The commission has reviewed services in 60% of health authorities, as well as more than 90% of NHS trusts providing mental health care for young people. Some authorities were found to spend up to seven times as much as others. Community services were often run by only a handful of people, and waiting times for assessment or treatment were frequently lengthy - one in 10 trusts being unable to offer routine appointments within six months. Shortages of skilled staff meant that 18% of child psychotherapist posts had been vacant more than three months (38% in London), as well as 13% of psychiatrist posts (31%), 16% of clinical psychologist jobs (27%) and 11% of social worker posts (38%). Almost half of child psychotherapist posts were found to be in the London region and very few were north of Birmingham, because until recently almost all training was done in north London. The commission's report, Children in Mind, said services need urgent improvement because troubled children often went on to take drugs, turn to crime and have babies at a young age. Of young people referred to specialist services, 40% lived with one natural parent and 34% came from a household where the main breadwinner was unemployed. The government has promised an extra £90m over three years to improve child and adolescent mental health care. Last week, ministers allocated the first £16m to the NHS for projects including a mental health task force for schools. Pressure groups say that today's report shows that more needs to be done.