Health websites get more hits than any other category on the internet - apart from pornography. That may not tell us anything profoundly new about the human psyche, but it is an explanation for the proliferating number of health sites. But not all the information on the net, and certainly not all the pills and potions for sale online, can be relied on. As Bob Gann, director of the NHS website, observed at its launch: "There's good information out there and there's bad information out there." One of the aims of his site, he said, was to "make it easier for people to find good information than it is to find bad". Like the far jollier and less patronising US government site at www.healthfinder.gov, NHS Direct's online service is intended to be a gateway to health information, pointing the sick or curious public in the direction of worthy sites, such as well-respected and longstanding patients' groups. But the UK site at www.nhsdirect.nhs.uk has various agendas. One is to encourage patients who do not need a doctor to look after themselves at home, while a nannyish section on healthy living gives tips on cutting down on alcohol and stopping smoking. Another aim is, as chief medical officer Liam Donaldson says on the site, to put health risks in perspective. "Media headlines can sometime be unjustifiably alarming and misleading." It is this tendency towards the dour - the old paternalism lingers on - that differentiates the US sites from the UK. Many UK sites have all the excitement of waiting room leaflets. On the other hand, a lot are entirely worthy, reliable and will not try to sell you Viagra online. The established patients' groups are a pretty safe and helpful way to proceed if you want information on treatment for a condition or other support, and there are a number of sites now that will direct you to them. Try www.patient.co.uk which also lists some telephone help-lines and patient leaflets. It is easier on the layman or woman than the more technical OMNI - Organising Medical Networked Information - which bills itself as the UK's gateway to high quality internet resources and is at www.omni.ac.uk Patients groups like the British Heart Foundation or the Cancer Research Campaign can tell you much about the condition and current treatment. For those looking for treatments that may not yet be available except in clinical trials, there are the major databases used by the professionals. Medline in the USA is the largest medical library in the world. It can be accessed via the US National Library of Medicine at www.nlm.nih.gov and most of it is free - there is a small charge for articles from some journals. The site urges consumers to try medline plus, which is a more patient-friendly way of going about things, with answers to questions and searches by disease which bring up the latest studies. Equally rock-solid is the Cochrane Collaboration, which reviews all the published studies on a condition to come to conclusions about best practice. It is available at www.update-software.com on subscription. Among the valuable, the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority deserves a mention for publishing copious online information, including performance tables of fertility clinics at www.hfea.gov.uk. It may be sober, but it is sound, which is more than you can be certain of with the US clinics that offer to sell online eggs and sperm. There are already websites offering consultations with doctors - even NHS Direct expects to incorporate a nurse to answer questions within five years. Most such sites are the email equivalent of "A Doctor Writes" in the newspapers and magazines, where you can get an answer to some problem too embarrassing to broach with the GP. Or you can find out what bothers other people. "Can marijuana affect fertility?" and "Colds: will washing my hands prevent them?" are a couple of concerns answered by Dr Dean Edell at health.yahoo.com. Also try Dr Ann at www.icircle.co.uk. Yahoo's health site offers a personal health test - a questionnaire to fill in for an assessment of your fitness, with all the usual caveats and disclaimers. Women can get something similar at www.allhealth.com/virtualcheckup. If you want a real personal consultation complete with diagnosis and prescription, for the moment you must go to America. CyberDocs ( www.cyberdocs.com ) offers US-trained physicians to diagnose your ills at any time and almost any place around the world - at a price, of course. For $50 to $75, you can talk to the doctor via a keyboard or videoconferencing. The site is intended for minor medical problems, but it is still highly controversial for doctors to issue a prescription without ever having seen the patient. And finally, there's cybersurgery - the new spectator sport. If blood and guts really turn you on, have a look at www.adoctorinyourhouse.com. Or you could even catch the world's first online sex-change operation - for a viewing charge of $9.95 - at www.amazingsurgeries.com. But be quick - this offer ends tomorrow.