Oliver James, in Britain on the Couch (1998), told us that we live in a ‘low serotonin society’. That is, the pressures of the kind of capitalism within which we exist led to a reduced level of a particular neurotransmitter: low levels of that chemical are associated with depression. However, at one revealing moment James said that figures indicated a 20 per cent rate of mental illness in the American population at any one time. ‘The real incidence of unhappiness,’ he went on, ‘is almost certainly much higher than this.’ ‘Unhappiness’, of course, is quite distinct from the disorder we call depression. James made great play of research on vervet monkeys, arguing that the lowered serotonin found in defeated, submissive males reflected their status. A lowering of serotonin helped the beaten monkey adjust to its station. ‘I find this explanation unsatisfactory,’ Lewis Wolpert writes mildly. ‘It is based on the assumption that depression is adaptive. There are no grounds for believing that simply because it is widespread it serves a purpose, any more than one would claim heart disease or cancer to be adaptive.’ ‘Severe depression in humans,’ Wolpert argues, ‘is an illness: it is pathological and prevents an affected individual from functioning properly.’ This passionate and brilliant book emerges from Wolpert’s own experience of depression, a condition he describes well as ‘a state that bears only a tangential resemblance to normal emotion’. Wolpert deals with his own illness only briefly, but in a way that stresses the intelligence and fortitude of his wife, the late Jill Neville. His title,Malignant Sadness, offers us the new term he says the disease needs, for depression is to sadness as cancer is to normal cell-growth. It is not merely a deepening but an error. Wolpert explores the evidence for a genetic origin for depression carefully and informatively, but is not prepared to lay the blame there entirely. Indeed, his implicit argument is that clinical depression is overdetermined, requiring a number of factors to be present before it emerges. Freud, Wolpert writes, ‘assumed that all love is ambivalent in depressives … and that hostility towards the loved object is turned inwards’. Actually, Freud thought all love was ambivalent; what he noted as particular to depressives was a collapse of self-regard. However, the suggestion that, especially when facing loss, depressives are angry with a beloved person whom they have internalised and partially identified with, is extremely helpful. Wolpert’s scepticism about psychoanalysis as a therapy is rational and well justified, but he might have made more of the finding he reports that ‘the Old Order Amish in the US, who practise pacifism and lead a life free of hostility and aggression, have a threefold higher rate of depression’. He calls this a ‘surprise’, but the Amish, admirable as they may be, are not all saints. No ordinary life is ‘free of hostility and aggression’, and it seems plausible that the Amish social structure requires such feelings to be turned on the self rather than being expressed. Depression is caused not by submitting to our circumstances but by our anger with ourselves for doing so. Wolpert quotes Dr John Horder, who compared depression with renal colic and a heart attack. ‘If I had to choose again,’ Horder said, ‘I would prefer to avoid the pain of depression. It is a surprisingly physical sensation, with a surprising resemblance to coronary pain. But it cannot be relieved quickly … It is oneself and not part of one’s machinery, a form of total paralysis of desire, hope, capacity to decide what to do, to think or to feel except pain and misery.’ In fact, one thing literate depressives do is morosely to read up on their sickness. Wolpert’s account of the brain chemistry involved seems to me unparalleled for clarity and common sense. Again, he will not blame one cause alone – tempted though he must, like all sufferers, be to do so.Therefore he writes well about how the disease should be treated. His account of drug therapies is accurate and helpful. Wolpert shows that, while the Freudian model of the unconscious remains totally unverified and pretty implausible, there may yet be a genuine, physically grounded unconscious set of memories in the brain, ones which can produce a characteristic emotional tone. Without saying so, he disposes of the ‘censor’, the Freudian mechanism which Sartre demonstrated was a logical nonsense. Aaron Beck, a psychoanalyst, became aware that his patients fell into habitual falsifications about themselves and their situation. As he saw, an unconscious of the kind Wolpert describes would explain this. His realisation led him to develop cognitive therapy, in which the patient learns to recognise such falsifications and to see how they form a pattern. This can help to release them from the self-confining purgatory which is their illness. Anyone who wants to know what severe depression is and how recovery from it feels should read this compelling and philosophically stimulating book. Nobody knows why some people get depression; if you are a woman you are twice as likely to suffer as a man, and over the past 30 years the rate for all categories has been rising. Wolpert’s comparisons with other cultures remind us, though, that however it may be perceived or, indeed, produced socially, depression is a sickness which strikes at the heart of being human. To order Malignant Sadness for the discount price of £7.99, plus 99p p&amp;p, call Observer CultureShop on 0500 500 171