We think of young children as clear water - fresh and transparent. When a child doesn’t fit this pure image as, most horribly, with James Bulger’s young killers, then we comfort ourselves by demonising them - as if a foul pollution called evil has been dropped into their source and turned them into something that can no longer be called a child. We recognise that adults can be cunning, lustful, greedy, deceitful and self-deceiving, weighed down by the baggage of their past. Adolescents worry us because we see sweet children break out with the incurable symptoms of unsweet adulthood. Yet still we persist in imagining children as simple: not scared, not lonely, not ashamed and not disturbed. The summary of a report on children’s mental health, commissioned by the Mental Health Foundation, was released last week and gives a picture at odds with this image. ‘Bright Futures’ draws together all the main existing research on mental problems among young people, and also includes evidence from more than 1,000 doctors, teachers, social workers and other professionals. It claims that one in five children and teenagers suffers mental health problems. One in 10 has problems sufficiently severe to require professional help. More than 8 per cent have difficulty in getting on with their everyday lives; 12 per cent have anxiety disorders; 10 per cent disruptive disorders; 5 per cent attention deficit disorders; 6 per cent developmental disorders. In ‘Bright Futures’, childhood becomes a kind of war zone of mounting academic expectations at school, marriage breakdowns, the breakdown of extended families, safety fears over outdoor play, drug abuse, lack of suitable childcare, a fractured sense of community, an uncertainty about the future, an insecurity about gender-specific roles. The figure of one in five overtakes all other similar findings, but even if it is exaggerated, even if the figure is, say, one in 10, the fear behind the statistic remains - we are, in some new ways, failing our children. Peter Wilson is the director of Young Mind, an organisation that was set up seven years ago because, as he puts it, he and a group of other like-minded individuals became increasingly frustrated that almost all the funding went to adult mental illness rather than children’s mental health. ‘We know that a lot of mental illness is laid down in childhood, yet children are not seen to have minds,’ he says. ‘They are sweet or they are devils. It’s a stereotypic view that goes back a long way. Maybe because the idea of the innocence of children is enormously appealing, we see them as not being troubled by the ambivalence and torments of adult life. I’m not sure how long that view of childhood innocence can last.’ Peter Wilson agrees with Neil Postmen, an American who wrote the influential book, The Disappearance of Childhood. Postmen believes that, until quite recently, there was a crucial distinction between the adult’s world and the child’s world, and that adults could police the child’s world and decide what knowledge they were, or were not, allowed access to. ‘Technology - TV, film, computers - has blasted all of that away. It has dissolved the differences. Whereas children used to have to qualify to become adults, by learning how to read, for example, anyone can consume TV. Adults have less power to demarcate childhood. Now, children may experience the same things as adults.’ Wilson thinks that the very notion of childhood has been eroded. ‘It’s not so much the diminishing of childhood innocence, but the fading of childhood as gradual development, gradual discovery, the gradual satisfaction of curiosity. It’s the gradualness that’s important - childhood is rushed now, chivvied up beyond the proper pace. Children are traumatised by knowledge.’ He believes children learn best left by themselves to find out, within a secure framework, about their world. There is something almost spiritual, he believes, about the imagination of a child who pieces things together in a slow, almost dreamlike process of discovery. He quotes Martin Amis on the effect of TV and films: ‘We wait to count the symptoms.’ Wilson agrees that family life is more difficult, too: ‘Of course, families can be nightmares and when the family is not so strong, parents often become dependent on children for support and affirmation. The adult layer starts to press down upon the children. Children are expected to be more resourceful, more accommodating, more resilient, more adult. As the world gets more uncertain, we expect children to hold certainties for us. The more adults can take care of themselves, the safer the child feels about being a child.’ He hates the added pressure put on children: league tables, proliferating tests, ‘all the Woodheads and fatheads’. He asks: ‘If as a child you are not up to scratch, then what are you?’ Allow them to dream, play with a sense of safety. ‘Children,’ he says rather sombrely, ‘are not as resilient as we like to think.’ Ryan is a 13-year-old from southeast London. He is a skinny, jumpy boy who won’t take off his baseball cap and who fiddles with his rucksack, but who looks me straight in the eye when he talks - a sweet, brown gaze. He is the single child of a single mother. He never sees his father and says he doesn’t really want to. He doesn’t go to school because he was badly bullied for several months. The whole class turned on him for reasons he tries to understand. ‘I’m a weird kid, you could say. I don’t like sport. I hate football. I like reading. I collect comics. I did think: Why me? Why not someone else? You know what I learnt? That it takes a week or two to lose all your self-confidence and a year or more to get it back. Or forever or never. I am quite lonely, but at least when I’m on my own I’m not being picked on.’ Ryan knows that, ‘there are lots of kids like me, who don’t feel they belong anywhere really. Children nowadays need to be cool. They need to be mega. You’ve always got to be alert; you’ve got to use your senses, you’ve got to stay alert and conscious of danger.’ Chrissie Verduyn is the director of child psychology for Manchester Children’s Hospital Trust. She sees a wide range of children, from the very sick to the simply wretched. She says children have very different ways of experiencing and expressing problems from adults, and that, particularly with under-11s, distress is not articulated but demonstrated through behaviour. ‘People often think they are a problem; instead of that they have a problem.’ She agrees that sadness is normal for children. ‘There’s a mental health problem when there’s a reaction which is out of proportion, or which has gone on too long, or which is intensely distressing. And there’s a mental health problem where it is interfering with life, where it is making the children fail in some area, where their confidence is being impaired.’ She says that there are a lot of children whose depression simply is not recognised. And she warns us against dismissing childhood sadness as ‘just growing up. We have to be vigilant. Children often do not realise why they are so miserable, and often they are just going unnoticed’. She describes the case of a boy of eight who was referred to her because of his behaviour. He had a three-year history of being disruptive at home and was now becoming disruptive at school as well; his reading and general academic attainments were falling off. he had become interested in fire-starting and had inadvertently injured his younger sister. His parents had a stormy relationship and his mother was very critical of her son. There’s another case of a 13-year-old girl who is irritable, difficult, whose work is falling off at school and whose parents feel that she has joined a ‘bad set’. It emerges that she feels unhappy, isolated and spends a lot of time alone in her room doing nothing. Interviewed away from her parents, she said things like ‘Nobody likes me’; ‘I’m fat and ugly’; ‘Everybody does better than me.’ But if we know what causes mental health difficulties, Verduyn says, we also know how to promote good mental health: by working with schools and parents; by helping parents feel confident with young children; by encouraging parents to do activities that are child-centred; by giving children time; by listening to them; by enjoying them in their own right; by encouraging them as individuals and giving each child a sense of his or her own value; by giving children, particularly boys, an emotional vocabulary. ‘I sound Utopian, don’t I?’ she says at the end of her list. ‘But we can make a difference.’ At a North London comprehensive, nine young teenagers sit around a table. The members of the philosophy club are discussing childhood and its problems. First, they talk about friendship. One girl says that it took her several years to find friends and until then she felt lonely and quite lost. The others agree with her: the move from primary to secondary school, they say, is traumatic. A boy says quietly that he still wishes he had more friends; that he doesn’t really have very many. The others look across at him and nod their heads sympathetically. A thin boy, who hasn’t spoken until now, suddenly pipes up: ‘I haven’t got any problems.’ ‘That’s just because you concentrate on work, keep your head down.’ ‘Maybe. But no matter how much people tease me, to lose my temper or get upset would be too surprising. I can’t do it, not with anyone. I should have problems, of course. Of all people here, I should be the one with problems.’ This boy is a war refugee. He says he has seen and experienced things no one else in the school could begin to imagine. ‘I think about it; I don’t block it out. Sometimes I get very sad about it; I cry about it. But it doesn’t disturb me.’ They talk about parental expectations and the expectations of their school; they groan over the amount of homework they have and the difficulty of balancing work and pleasure. A girl speaks up: ‘I don’t go out much at all,’ she says. It turns out that she is a young carer - she looks after her ill mother and her life is made up of ‘school, looking after mum, homework; that’s all.’ She has been severely depressed and, she says, ‘thought about suicide. There was nothing to look forward to really.’ She fell behind in her school work, got increasingly wretched and only when a group was set up to support young carers and she found that there were other children like herself did she start to feel in control of her life. She says she suffers from three levels of depression: when she eats chocolate, when she stops eating altogether and when she doesn’t care whether she eats or not, lives or not: ‘It’s not caring that is dangerous.’ They laugh at the chocolate. ‘I listen to Radiohead when I’m depressed,’ says one boy. ‘It helps when you know that someone else’s life is worse than your own.’ When this girl speaks, there is no sense that she is complaining about her life - she clearly loves her mother and is close to her. Yet it seems that she has lost her childhood, that she took on adult responsibilities long ago. More than half the children come from split families. A couple prefer it that way - the arguments were worse than the separation. They all seem protective of their mothers - two of the girls talk of not being able to show their anger or sadness at home because their mothers already have too much to bear. They all recognise the pressure on them to fit in; they start talking about which clothes you should or should not wear; which pop groups are cool and which are not. One boy says that he wears clothes as a ‘shock tactic’, to divert people looking further at him. He thinks he has done this ever since his parents split up: he just doesn’t want people to ‘see what I am like’. ‘I’m not handsome or good at sport. Well, look at me.’ He looks just fine to me. They recognise that bullying can be a way of wanting to belong. Only the refugee says with a frown that ‘he just doesn’t get why it’s cool to be cruel’. One boy says suddenly: ‘I don’t think that I ever do what I want or behave as I feel, even when I am with friends. You can’t really let yourself be yourself. It’s not safe.’ ‘No,’ agrees his friend. ‘You can never let your guard down. Sometimes, you let it down a bit, but you always have to be ready to defend yourself; you’ve got to keep one step ahead of things.’ ‘It’s easier,’ says someone else, ‘if you don’t care. It’s dangerous when you care.’ In many ways, listening to these children being subtle, empathetic, thoughtful and full of shrewd insights, I was struck by how like adults they are. They have many of the same difficulties, fears and desires as adults, except they have the added problem of being a child. They have the sense of responsibility without the sense of control. As children, they have little control over their environment. If adults find it hard enough to see beyond their depression, then imagine what it’s like for a child. They are like Hansel and Gretel in their dark wood - resourceful, resilient and anxious that they’re lost.