Feminism was meant to have saved women from oppression; they were told 'girl power' could put them in charge of their own destiny. But it was all a sham, according to a study to be published this week. While a few high-achievers make the headlines, more women than ever are suffering depression over inequality in social conditions, relationships and employment. The study, to be published by the American Psychological Association, shows for the first time that, even though the fight for equal rights widened opportunities for many, it failed to give women control over their lives. The findings show that tackling the lion's share of housework and childcare leaves women across the social spectrum in despair. They also explode the media myth that men have suffered most from the redefining of gender stereotypes. Far from worrying about relegation to sperm banks, men still seem to have women firmly under control. Women of all ages and backgrounds told researchers they felt miserable and unappreciated. Though more women than ever work, they still shoulder the burden of domestic duties. They do not feel they 'have it all'. Health professionals have acknowledged for years that twice as many women as men are depressed. But the US researchers believe doctors have been wrong to treat this as a biological, rather than a social, problem. Reports of increasing depression among young men overshadow the fact that more women suffer - 40 per cent will report symptoms at some point, compared with less than 20 per cent of men. Today's twentysomething woman is three times as likely to suffer serious depression as her Fifties counterpart was. Two-thirds of those who receive the 1,300 controversial electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) treatments administered in the UK each week for depressive illness are women. 'The grinding burden of being a woman is a desperate cycle of boring responsibilities and low social power,' said one of the study's authors, US psychologist Susan Nolen-Hoeksema. She told The Observer that what is thought of as a female strength - talking or thinking about problems - only makes matters worse: the more a sense of inequality preys on women's minds, the less likely they are to be able to deal with it. One of Britain's top psychologists, best-selling author Dr Dorothy Rowe, said the research reinforced her clinical experiences. 'Doctors have been looking at depression in women as a physical ailment, and doling out drugs. Once housewives got Valium to shut them up, now it's Prozac. 'But we get depressed when we blame ourselves for what's gone wrong in our life, thinking we are bad. Girls are especially prone because they are brought up like that - if you're not a good girl, people won't love you. Women can't move out of the prison of depression because putting themselves first would be selfish and therefore bad. Feminism failed depressed women because it never got to grips with that kind of issue. The burdens placed on women through the centuries to keep us in order haven't gone.' Advertising executive Patricia Ford, 38, is a mother of two and the main breadwinner in her family. 'I am a feminist. I rejected traditional values but still accepted a situation where I bore the children, cared for them, collected them from childcare I had arranged, cooked, worked, nagged my partner to help until I was just sinking. 'At work I have seen young men outstrip me professionally until I am numb to it. I went to the doctor about a rash, broke down in tears and left with Prozac. I even felt powerless to tell the doctor I didn't want drugs.' She did consider leaving her partner, but says: I've reached a realisation that my expectations of being on a truly equal footing with a man, any man, were just fairyland.' The differences in depression rates between the sexes has been known for years, but not the reason for it. The last major study in Britain, in the Seventies, showed a majority of women living on a council estate had undiagnosed clinical depression. Most felt powerless in their lives and especially in their relationships. Those who have publicly admitted despair despite high material achievement include former Spice Girl Geri Halliwell, who left the 'girl power' band complaining of loneliness and lack of control. The Duchess of Kent, Libby Purves, Sinéad O'Connor, and actress Nicola Paget have all succumbed to depression. Nolen-Hoeksema said: 'It all starts early in life, when boys are taught to handle emotionally charged situations while girls tend to be consoled with a hug and a "there, there" approach. Rumination drains women of motivation, persistence and problem-solving skills to change their situations. 'Failing to do what one can to overcome stressful situations, such as an unfulfilling marriage or inequitable distribution of labour at home, perpetuates them. Changing the social circumstances that many women face is vital.' Jan Wallcraft, programme manager at the Mental Health Foundation, said: 'Sadly for women, having it all means doing it all.'