As discussed last week, our bodies need cholesterol to transport hormones, synthesise vitamin D and produce the myelin sheath: the protective substance that surrounds nerves. Too much cholesterol, however, exposes us to heart disease, which kills 200,000 people in Britain every year. Cholesterol, produced in our bodies and found naturally in some foods, is a whitish, fatty substance which only becomes a problem when you have too much of it. You can easily and painlessly find out your levels by either asking your doctor for a blood test, or buying a self-testing kit. Too much 'bad' cholesterol (produced by saturated animal fats) and insufficient 'good' cholesterol (from oily fish, garlic and alcohol - but more of this later), promotes the production of a fatty plaque which can clog up your arteries. The interruption of blood flow in a main heart vessel can cause a heart attack or a stroke if the block is in the blood vessel leading to your brain. Blocked arteries also cause circulation problems - numbness and pain in hands and feet - as well as kidney disease. A fatty plaque is formed when unused cholesterol stays in the blood and irritates the blood-vessel lining. Nicotine from cigarettes and abnormally high sugar levels also irritate the lining of the blood vessels and make them more susceptible to developing a plaque. Last week, I said that the way to improve our blood profile is to eat more of the foods that help us produce good cholesterol and less of the foods that stimulate bad cholesterol. Alcohol also helps us to produce more good cholesterol and reduces the risk of thrombosis. It even helps to increase levels of vitamin E (high levels of which have been shown to reduce the incidence of heart disease). Wine drinkers, particularly, seem to enjoy better cardiovascular health than either beer drinkers or teetotallers, provided they have no more than two glasses of wine a day. The next-best option seems to be cloudy (sedimented or yeast) beer, but all forms of alcohol are better for blood fat levels than abstention. But bear in mind that alcohol in excess of the recommended maximum of 28 units for men and 21 units for women increases the production of bad cholesterol as well as damaging fats called triglycerides. Over-imbibing also increases the risk of cardiomyopathy (disease of the heart muscle) and liver damage. Some alcohols have another point in their favour: they can be high in antioxidants, which interfere with the way bad cholesterol behaves in the blood vessels. In order for bad cholesterol to start forming a fatty plaque, it needs to oxidise. Red wine is particularly high in powerful antioxidants such as anthocyanin, tannin, resveratrol and catechin, so a couple of glasses a day can reduce the risk of heart disease. For those who don't like red wine, darker beers contain more beneficial antioxidants than paler beers. If you don't already drink alcohol, avoid the possibility of an adverse reaction by checking with your doctor before you start. The same goes for anyone taking medication. Not all antioxidants come in a bottle, by the way: the most powerful are found in food. Prime players are betacarotene (carrots, dark green vegetables, tomatoes, red and yellow peppers, pumpkins, apricots, peaches, mangos and plums); vitamin C (citrus fruits, berries, green leafy vegetables, peppers); vitamin E (avocados, blackberries, mangos, spinach, watercress) and selenium (fruit and vegetables, Brazil nuts, cashew nuts, sunflower seeds, wholewheat bread). The selenium content of foods depends on the the soil in which they are grown. Modern farming practices have reduced the selenium content of some soils in Britain. However, based on current research, these reduced levels are adequate. If you eat at least five portions of fresh fruit or vegetables every day, you should cover your needs (a portion equals a piece of fruit, such as a whole orange or kiwi, a large helping of spinach, broccoli or carrots or a bowl of vegetable soup). The fresher the produce and the less time it's cooked, the higher the antioxidant level Frozen fruit and vegetables can be as good, and even better, than so-called fresh produce. As with the concern over selenium levels, many people worry that the vitamin content of foods is too low by the time we get around to eating it, and feel they should take a supplement, to be safe. I do not believe this is necessary, as long as you are eating a well-balanced diet with, as I've said, at least five portions of fresh fruit or vegetables every day. Your body can only tackle so much fat at any one time. Leaving your gut without any food for hours and hours and then eating a large meal overloads your system, and the result is an increased amount of bad cholesterol. Try to eat small meals often or grab a banana in the afternoon if you know you're not going to be eating until late. Carrying too much fat (especially around the middle) increases blood pressure, as the fat presses on the major blood vessels leading to and from the heart. Too much stress and too little exercise are also risk factors for heart disease. Keep active, eat a balanced, antioxidant-rich diet, enjoy a glass of wine or two, and your cholesterol profile should stay at a healthy level.